<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>4.3. Opening a File: open()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">4.3. Opening a File: <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span></h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> system call either opens an existing file or creates and opens a new file.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/stat.h&gt;
#include &lt;fcntl.h&gt;

int <b>open</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>, ... /* mode_t <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> */);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns file descriptor on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The file to be opened is identified by the <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> argument. If <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> is a symbolic link, it is dereferenced. On success, <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> returns a file descriptor that is used to refer to the file in subsequent system calls. If an error occurs, <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> returns -1 and <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> is set accordingly.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> argument is a bit mask that specifies the <span class="docEmphasis">access mode</span> for the file, using one of the constants shown in Table 4-2.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Early UNIX implementations used the numbers 0, 1, and 2 instead of the names shown in Table 4-2. Most modern UNIX implementations define these constants to have those values. Thus, we can see that <tt>O_RDWR</tt> is not equivalent to <tt>O_RDONLY | O_WRONLY</tt>; the latter combination is a logical error.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">When <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> is used to create a new file, the <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> bit-mask argument specifies the permissions to be placed on the file. (The <span class="docEmphasis">mode_t</span> data type used to type <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> is an integer type specified in SUSv3.) If the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> call doesn’t specify <tt>O_CREAT</tt>, <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> can be omitted.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 4-2. File access modes</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Access mode</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_RDONLY</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Open the file for reading only</td></tr><tr><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_WRONLY</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Open the file for writing only</td></tr><tr><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_RDWR</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Open the file for both reading and writing</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">We
 describe file permissions in detail in Section 15.4. Later, we’ll see 
that the permissions actually placed on a new file depend not just on 
the <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> argument, but also on the process umask (Section 15.4.6) and the (optionally present) default access control list (Section 17.6) of the parent directory. In the meantime, we’ll just note that the <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> argument can be specified as a number (typically in octal) or, preferably, by ORing (<tt>|</tt>) together zero or more of the bit-mask constants listed in Table 15-4, in Section 15.4.</p><p class="docText">Example 4-2 shows examples of the use of <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>, some of which employ additional <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> bits that we describe shortly.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E5VAG">Example 4-2. Examples of the use of <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedWidth">/* Open existing file for reading */

    fd = open("startup", O_RDONLY);
    if (fd == -1)
        errExit("open");

    /* Open new or existing file for reading and writing, truncating to zero
       bytes; file permissions read+write for owner, nothing for all others */

    fd = open("myfile", O_RDWR | O_CREAT | O_TRUNC, S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR);
    if (fd == -1)
        errExit("open");

    /* Open new or existing file for writing; writes should always
       append to end of file */

    fd = open("w.log", O_WRONLY | O_CREAT | O_TRUNC | O_APPEND,
                       S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR);
    if (fd == -1)
        errExit("open");

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGWAG">4.3.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EKWAG">4.3.1.1. File descriptor number returned by <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span></h5><p class="docText">SUSv3 specifies that if <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>
 succeeds, it is guaranteed to use the lowest-numbered unused file 
descriptor for the process. We can use this feature to ensure that a 
file is opened using a particular file descriptor. For example, the 
following sequence ensures that a file is opened using standard input 
(file descriptor 0).</p><pre>if (close(STDIN_FILENO) == -1)      /* Close file descriptor 0 */
    errExit("close");

fd = open(pathname, O_RDONLY);
if (fd == -1)
    errExit("open");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Since file descriptor 0 is unused, <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> is guaranteed to open the file using that descriptor. In Section 5.5, we look at the use of <span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>
 to achieve a similar result, but with more flexible control over the 
file descriptor used. In that section, we also show an example of why it
 can be useful to control the file descriptor on which a file is opened.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGYAG">4.3.2. The <span class="docEmphasis">open() flags</span> Argument</h4><p class="docText">In some of the example <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> calls shown in Example 4-2, we included other bits (<tt>O_CREAT</tt>, <tt>O_TRUNC</tt>, and <tt>O_APPEND</tt>) in <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> in addition to the file access mode. We now consider the <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> argument in more detail. Table 4-3 summarizes the full set of constants that can be bit-wise ORed (<tt>|</tt>) in <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>. The final column indicates which of these constants are standardized in SUSv3 or SUSv4.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 4-3. Values for the <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> argument of <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span></h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Flag</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Purpose</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">SUS?</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_RDONLY</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Open for reading only</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">v3</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_WRONLY</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Open for writing only</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">v3</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_RDWR</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Open for reading and writing</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">v3</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_CLOEXEC</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Set the close-on-exec flag (since Linux 2.6.23)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">v4</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_CREAT</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Create file if it doesn’t already exist</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">v3</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_DIRECT</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">File I/O bypasses buffer cache</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_DIRECTORY</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Fail if <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> is not a directory</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">v4</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_EXCL</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">With <span class="docEmphasis">O_CREAT</span>: create file exclusively</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">v3</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_LARGEFILE</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Used on 32-bit systems to open large files</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_NOATIME</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Don’t update file last access time on <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> (since Linux 2.6.8)</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_NOCTTY</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Don’t let <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> become the controlling terminal</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">v3</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_NOFOLLOW</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Don’t dereference symbolic links</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">v4</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_TRUNC</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Truncate existing file to zero length</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">v3</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_APPEND</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Writes are always appended to end of file</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">v3</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_ASYNC</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Generate a signal when I/O is possible</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_DSYNC</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Provide synchronized I/O data integrity (since Linux 2.6.33)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">v3</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Open in nonblocking mode</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">v3</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_SYNC</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Make file writes synchronous</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">v3</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">The constants in Table 4-3 are divided into the following groups:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">File access mode flags</span>: These are the <tt>O_RDONLY</tt>, <tt>O_WRONLY</tt>, and <tt>O_RDWR</tt> flags described earlier. Only one of these values should be specified in <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>. The access mode can be retrieved using the <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> <tt>F_GETFL</tt> operation (Section 5.3).</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">File creation flags</span>: These are the flags shown in the second part of Table 4-3. They control various aspects of the behavior of the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> call, as well as options for subsequent I/O operations. These flags can’t be retrieved or changed.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Open file status flags</span>: These are the remaining flags in Table 4-3. They can be retrieved and modified using the <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> <tt>F_GETFL</tt> and <tt>F_SETFL</tt> operations (Section 5.3). These flags are sometimes simply called the <span class="docEmphasis">file status flags</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Since kernel 2.6.22, the Linux-specific files in the directory <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/fdinfo</tt>
 can be read to obtain information about the file descriptors of any 
process on the system. There is one file in this directory for each of 
the process’s open file descriptors, with a name that matches the number
 of the descriptor. The <span class="docEmphasis">pos</span> field in this file shows the current file offset (Section 4.7). The <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>
 field is an octal number that shows the file access mode flags and open
 file status flags. (To decode this number, we need to look at the 
numeric values of these flags in the C library header files.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li></ul><p class="docText">Details for the <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> constants are as follows:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">O_APPEND</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Writes are always appended to the end of the file. We discuss the significance of this flag in Section 5.1.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">O_ASYNC</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Generate a signal when I/O becomes possible on the file descriptor returned by <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>. This feature, termed <span class="docEmphasis">signal-driven I/O</span>, is available only for certain file types, such as terminals, FIFOs, and sockets. (The <tt>O_ASYNC</tt> flag is not specified in SUSv3; however, it, or the older synonym, <tt>FASYNC</tt>, is found on most UNIX implementations.) On Linux, specifying the <tt>O_ASYNC</tt> flag when calling <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> has no effect. To enable signal-driven I/O, we must instead set this flag using the <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> <tt>F_SETFL</tt> operation (Section 5.3). (Several other UNIX implementations behave similarly.) Refer to Section 63.3 for more information about the <tt>O_ASYNC</tt> flag.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">O_CLOEXEC</span></span> (since Linux 2.6.23)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Enable the close-on-exec flag (<tt>FD_CLOEXEC</tt>) for the new file descriptor. We describe the <tt>FD_CLOEXEC</tt> flag in Section 27.4. Using the <tt>O_CLOEXEC</tt> flag allows a program to avoid additional <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> <tt>F_GETFD</tt> and <tt>F_SETFD</tt>
 operations to set the close-on-exec flag. It is also necessary in 
multithreaded programs to avoid the race conditions that could occur 
using the latter technique. These races can occur when one thread opens a
 file descriptor and then tries to mark it close-on-exec at the same 
time as another thread does a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> and then an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> of an arbitrary program. (Suppose that the second thread manages to both <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> between the time the first thread opens the file descriptor and uses <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>
 to set the close-on-exec flag.) Such races could result in open file 
descriptors being unintentionally passed to unsafe programs. (We say 
more about race conditions in Section 5.1.)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">O_CREAT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">If
 the file doesn’t already exist, it is created as a new, empty file. 
This flag is effective even if the file is being opened only for 
reading. If we specify <tt>O_CREAT</tt>, then we must supply a <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> argument in the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> call; otherwise, the permissions of the new file will be set to some random value from the stack.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">O_DIRECT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Allow file I/O to bypass the buffer cache. This feature is described in Section 13.6. The <tt>_GNU_SOURCE</tt> feature test macro must be defined in order to make this constant definition available from <tt>&lt;fcntl.h&gt;</tt>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">O_DIRECTORY</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Return an error (<span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> equals <tt>ENOTDIR</tt>) if <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> is not a directory. This flag is an extension designed specifically for implementing <span class="docEmphasis">opendir()</span> (Section 18.8). The <tt>_GNU_SOURCE</tt> feature test macro must be defined in order to make this constant definition available from <tt>&lt;fcntl.h&gt;</tt>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">O_DSYNC</span></span> (since Linux 2.6.33)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Perform
 file writes according to the requirements of synchronized I/O data 
integrity completion. See the discussion of kernel I/O buffering in 
Section 13.3.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">O_EXCL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This flag is used in conjunction with <tt>O_CREAT</tt> to indicate that if the file already exists, it should not be opened; instead, <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> should fail, with <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> set to <tt>EEXIST</tt>.
 In other words, this flag allows the caller to ensure that it is the 
process creating the file. The check for existence and the creation of 
the file are performed <span class="docEmphasis">atomically</span>. We discuss the concept of atomicity in Section 5.1. When both <tt>O_CREAT</tt> and <tt>O_EXCL</tt> are specified in <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> fails (with the error <tt>EEXIST</tt>) if <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>
 is a symbolic link. SUSv3 requires this behavior so that a privileged 
application can create a file in a known location without there being a 
possibility that a symbolic link would cause the file to be created in a
 different location (e.g., a system directory), which would have 
security implications.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">O_LARGEFILE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Open
 the file with large file support. This flag is used on 32-bit systems 
in order to work with large files. Although it is not specified in 
SUSv3, the <tt>O_LARGEFILE</tt> flag is found 
on several other UNIX implementations. On 64-bit Linux implementations 
such as Alpha and IA-64, this flag has no effect. See Section 5.10 for more information.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">O_NOATIME</span></span> (since Linux 2.6.8)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Don’t update the file last access time (the <span class="docEmphasis">st_atime</span> field described in Section 15.1)
 when reading from this file. To use this flag, the effective user ID of
 the calling process must match the owner of the file, or the process 
must be privileged (<tt>CAP_FOWNER</tt>); otherwise, <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> fails with the error <tt>EPERM</tt>.
 (In reality, for an unprivileged process, it is the process’s 
file-system user ID, rather than its effective user ID, that must match 
the user ID of the file when opening a file with the <tt>O_NOATIME</tt> flag, as described in Section 9.5.) This flag is a nonstandard Linux extension. To expose its definition from <tt>&lt;fcntl.h&gt;</tt>, we must define the <tt>_GNU_SOURCE</tt> feature test macro. The <tt>O_NOATIME</tt>
 flag is intended for use by indexing and backup programs. Its use can 
significantly reduce the amount of disk activity, because repeated disk 
seeks back and forth across the disk are not required to read the 
contents of a file and to update the last access time in the file’s 
i-node (Section 14.4). Functionality similar to <tt>O_NOATIME</tt> is available using the <tt>MS_NOATIME</tt> <span class="docEmphasis">mount()</span> flag (Section 14.8.1) and the <tt>FS_NOATIME_FL</tt> flag (Section 15.5).</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">O_NOCTTY</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">If
 the file being opened is a terminal device, prevent it from becoming 
the controlling terminal. Controlling terminals are discussed in Section
 34.4. If the file being opened is not a terminal, this flag has no 
effect.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">O_NOFOLLOW</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Normally, <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> dereferences <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> if it is a symbolic link. However, if the <tt>O_NOFOLLOW</tt> flag is specified, then <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> fails (with <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> set to <tt>ELOOP</tt>) if <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> is a symbolic link. This flag is useful, especially in privileged programs, for ensuring that <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> doesn’t dereference a symbolic link. To expose the definition of this flag from <tt>&lt;fcntl.h&gt;</tt>, we must define the <tt>_GNU_SOURCE</tt> feature test macro.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">O_NONBLOCK</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Open the file in nonblocking mode. See Section 5.9.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">O_SYNC</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Open the file for synchronous I/O. See the discussion of kernel I/O buffering in Section 13.3.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">O_TRUNC</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">If
 the file already exists and is a regular file, then truncate it to zero
 length, destroying any existing data. On Linux, truncation occurs 
whether the file is being opened for reading or writing (in both cases, 
we must have write permission on the file). SUSv3 leaves the combination
 of <tt>O_RDONLY</tt> and <tt>O_TRUNC</tt> unspecified, but most other UNIX implementations behave in the same way as Linux.</p></dd></dl><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EB1BG">4.3.3. Errors from <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span></h4><p class="docText">If an error occurs while trying to open the file, <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> returns -1, and <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>
 identifies the cause of the error. The following are some possible 
errors that can occur (in addition to those already noted when 
describing the <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> argument above):</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">EACCES</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The file permissions don’t allow the calling process to open the file in the mode specified by <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>.
 Alternatively, because of directory permissions, the file could not be 
accessed, or the file did not exist and could not be created.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">EISDIR</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The
 specified file is a directory, and the caller attempted to open it for 
writing. This isn’t allowed. (On the other hand, there are occasions 
when it can be useful to open a directory for reading. We consider an 
example in Section 18.11.)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">EMFILE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The process resource limit on the number of open file descriptors has been reached (<tt>RLIMIT_NOFILE</tt>, described in Section 36.3).</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">ENFILE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The system-wide limit on the number of open files has been reached.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">ENOENT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The specified file doesn’t exist, and <tt>O_CREAT</tt> was not specified, or <tt>O_CREAT</tt> was specified, and one of the directories in <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> doesn’t exist or is a symbolic link pointing to a nonexistent pathname (a dangling link).</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">EROFS</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The specified file is on a read-only file system and the caller tried to open it for writing.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">ETXTBSY</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The
 specified file is an executable file (a program) that is currently 
executing. It is not permitted to modify (i.e., open for writing) the 
executable file associated with a running program. (We must first 
terminate the program in order to be able to modify the executable 
file.)</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">When we 
later describe other system calls or library functions, we generally 
won’t list the range of possible errors that may occur in the above 
fashion. (Such a list can be found in the corresponding manual page for 
each system call or library function.) We do so here for two reasons. 
One of these is that <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>
 is the first system call that we describe in detail, and the above list
 illustrates that a system call or library function may fail for any of a
 number of reasons. Second, the specific reasons why <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>
 may fail make an interesting list in themselves, illustrating a number 
of factors and checks that come into play when a file is accessed. (The 
above list is incomplete: see the <span class="docEmphasis">open(2)</span> manual page for more reasons why <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> may fail.)</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EP6BG">4.3.4. The <span class="docEmphasis">creat()</span> System Call</h4><p class="docText">In early UNIX implementations, <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> had only two arguments and could not be used to create a new file. Instead, the <span class="docEmphasis">creat()</span> system call was used to create and open a new file.</p><pre>#include &lt;fcntl.h&gt;

int <b>creat</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, mode_t <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns file descriptor, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">creat()</span> system call creates and opens a new file with the given <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, or if the file already exists, opens the file and truncates it to zero length. As its function result, <span class="docEmphasis">creat()</span> returns a file descriptor that can be used in subsequent system calls. Calling <span class="docEmphasis">creat()</span> is equivalent to the following <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> call:</p><pre>fd = open(pathname, O_WRONLY | O_CREAT | O_TRUNC, mode);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Because the <span class="docEmphasis">open() flags</span> argument provides greater control over how the file is opened (e.g., we can specify <tt>O_RDWR</tt> instead of <tt>O_WRONLY</tt>), <span class="docEmphasis">creat()</span> is now obsolete, although it may still be seen in older programs.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
