<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>4.4. Reading from a File: read()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">4.4. Reading from a File: <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span></h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> system call reads data from the open file referred to by the descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

ssize_t <b>read</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, void *<span class="docEmphasis">buffer</span>, size_t <span class="docEmphasis">count</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns number of bytes read, 0 on EOF, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">count</span> argument specifies the maximum number of bytes to read. (The <span class="docEmphasis">size_t</span> data type is an unsigned integer type.) The <span class="docEmphasis">buffer</span> argument supplies the address of the memory buffer into which the input data is to be placed. This buffer must be at least <span class="docEmphasis">count</span> bytes long.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">System
 calls don’t allocate memory for buffers that are used to return 
information to the caller. Instead, we must pass a pointer to a 
previously allocated memory buffer of the correct size. This contrasts 
with several library functions that <span class="docEmphasis">do</span> allocate memory buffers in order to return information to the caller.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">A successful call to <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> returns the number of bytes actually read, or 0 if end-of-file is encountered. On error, the usual -1 is returned. The <span class="docEmphasis">ssize_t</span> data type is a signed integer type used to hold a byte count or a -1 error indication.</p><p class="docText">A call to <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>
 may read less than the requested number of bytes. For a regular file, 
the probable reason for this is that we were close to the end of the 
file.</p><p class="docText">When <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>
 is applied to other types of files—such as pipes, FIFOs, sockets, or 
terminals—there are also various circumstances where it may read fewer 
bytes than requested. For example, by default, a <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> from a terminal reads characters only up to the next newline (<tt>\n</tt>) character. We consider these cases when we cover other file types in subsequent chapters.</p><p class="docText">Using <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> to input a series of characters from, say, a terminal, we might expect the following code to work:</p><pre>#define MAX_READ 20
char buffer[MAX_READ];

if (read(STDIN_FILENO, buffer, MAX_READ) == -1)
    errExit("read");
printf("The input data was: %s\n", buffer);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The output from this piece of
 code is likely to be strange, since it will probably include characters
 in addition to the string actually entered. This is because <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> doesn’t place a terminating null byte at the end of the string that <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> is being asked to print. A moment’s reflection leads us to realize that this must be so, since <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>
 can be used to read any sequence of bytes from a file. In some cases, 
this input might be text, but in other cases, the input might be binary 
integers or C structures in binary form. There is no way for <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>
 to tell the difference, and so it can’t attend to the C convention of 
null terminating character strings. If a terminating null byte is 
required at the end of the input buffer, we must put it there 
explicitly:</p><pre>char buffer[MAX_READ + 1];
ssize_t numRead;

numRead = read(STDIN_FILENO, buffer, MAX_READ);
if (numRead == -1)
    errExit("read");

buffer[numRead] = '\0';
printf("The input data was: %s\n", buffer);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Because the terminating null byte requires a byte of memory, the size of <span class="docEmphasis">buffer</span> must be at least one greater than the largest string we expect to read.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
