<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>4.6. Closing a File: close()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">4.6. Closing a File: <span class="docEmphasis">close()</span></h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">close()</span>
 system call closes an open file descriptor, freeing it for subsequent 
reuse by the process. When a process terminates, all of its open file 
descriptors are automatically closed.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

int <b>close</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">It
 is usually good practice to close unneeded file descriptors explicitly,
 since this makes our code more readable and reliable in the face of 
subsequent modifications. Furthermore, file descriptors are a consumable
 resource, so failure to close a file descriptor could result in a 
process running out of descriptors. This is a particularly important 
issue when writing long-lived programs that deal with multiple files, 
such as shells or network servers.</p><p class="docText">Just like every other system call, a call to <span class="docEmphasis">close()</span> should be bracketed with error-checking code, such as the following:</p><pre>if (close(fd) == -1)
    errExit("close");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This catches errors such as
 attempting to close an unopened file descriptor or close the same file 
descriptor twice, and catches error conditions that a specific file 
system may diagnose during a close operation.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">NFS
 (Network File System) provides an example of an error that is specific 
to a file system. If an NFS commit failure occurs, meaning that the data
 did not reach the remote disk, then this error is propagated to the 
application as a failure in the <span class="docEmphasis">close()</span> call.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
