<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>4.8. Operations Outside the Universal I/O Model: ioctl()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">4.8. Operations Outside the Universal I/O Model: <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span></h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span>
 system call is a general-purpose mechanism for performing file and 
device operations that fall outside the universal I/O model described 
earlier in this chapter.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/ioctl.h&gt;

int <b>ioctl</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">request</span>, ... /* <span class="docEmphasis">argp</span> */);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Value returned on success depends on <span class="docEmphasis">request</span>, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span> argument is an open file descriptor for the device or file upon which the control operation specified by <span class="docEmphasis">request</span> is to be performed. Device-specific header files define constants that can be passed in the <span class="docEmphasis">request</span> argument.</p><p class="docText">As indicated by the standard C ellipsis (<tt>...</tt>) notation, the third argument to <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span>, which we label <span class="docEmphasis">argp</span>, can be of any type. The value of the <span class="docEmphasis">request</span> argument enables <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> to determine what type of value to expect in <span class="docEmphasis">argp</span>. Typically, <span class="docEmphasis">argp</span> is a pointer to either an integer or a structure; in some cases, it is unused.</p><p class="docText">We’ll see a number of uses for <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> in later chapters (see, for example, Section 15.5).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The only specification that SUSv3 makes for <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span>
 is for operations to control STREAMS devices. (The STREAMS facility is a
 System V feature that is not supported by the mainline Linux kernel, 
although a few add-on implementations have been developed.) None of the 
other <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> operations described in this book is specified in SUSv3. However, the <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> call has been part of the UNIX system since early versions, and consequently several of the <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> operations that we describe are provided on many other UNIX implementations. As we describe each <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> operation, we note portability issues.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
