<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>4.9. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">4.9. Summary</h3><p class="docText">In order to perform I/O on a regular file, we must first obtain a file descriptor using <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>. I/O is then performed using <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>. After performing all I/O, we should free the file descriptor and its associated resources using <span class="docEmphasis">close()</span>. These system calls can be used to perform I/O on all types of files.</p><p class="docText">The
 fact that all file types and device drivers implement the same I/O 
interface allows for universality of I/O, meaning that a program can 
typically be used with any type of file without requiring code that is 
specific to the file type.</p><p class="docText">For
 each open file, the kernel maintains a file offset, which determines 
the location at which the next read or write will occur. The file offset
 is implicitly updated by reads and writes. Using <span class="docEmphasis">lseek()</span>,
 we can explicitly reposition the file offset to any location within the
 file or past the end of the file. Writing data at a position beyond the
 previous end of the file creates a hole in the file. Reads from a file 
hole return bytes containing zeros.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> system call is a catchall for device and file operations that don’t fit into the standard file I/O model.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
