<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 5. File I/O: Further Details</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0E6YAG">Chapter 5. File I/O: Further Details</h2><p class="docText">In this chapter, we extend the discussion of file I/O that we started in the previous chapter.</p><p class="docText">In continuing the discussion of the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> system call, we explain the concept of <span class="docEmphasis">atomicity</span>—the
 notion that the actions performed by a system call are executed as a 
single uninterruptible step. This is a necessary requirement for the 
correct operation of many system calls.</p><p class="docText">We introduce another file-related system call, the multipurpose <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>, and show one of its uses: fetching and setting open file status flags.</p><p class="docText">Next,
 we look at the kernel data structures used to represent file 
descriptors and open files. Understanding the relationship between these
 structures clarifies some of the subtleties of file I/O discussed in 
subsequent chapters. Building on this model, we then explain how to 
duplicate file descriptors.</p><p class="docText">We
 then consider some system calls that provide extended read and write 
functionality. These system calls allow us to perform I/O at a specific 
location in a file without changing the file offset, and to transfer 
data to and from multiple buffers in a program.</p><p class="docText">We briefly introduce the concept of nonblocking I/O, and describe some extensions provided to support I/O on very large files.</p><p class="docText">Since
 temporary files are used by many system programs, we’ll also look at 
some library functions that allow us to create and use temporary files 
with randomly generated unique names.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
