<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>5.5. Duplicating File Descriptors</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">5.5. Duplicating File Descriptors</h3><p class="docText">Using the (Bourne shell) I/O redirection syntax <tt>2&gt;&amp;1</tt>
 informs the shell that we wish to have standard error (file descriptor 
2) redirected to the same place to which standard output (file 
descriptor 1) is being sent. Thus, the following command would (since 
the shell evaluates I/O directions from left to right) send both 
standard output and standard error to the file <tt>results.log</tt>:</p><pre>$ <b>./myscript &gt; results.log 2&gt;&amp;1</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The shell achieves the 
redirection of standard error by duplicating file descriptor 2 so that 
it refers to the same open file description as file descriptor 1 (in the
 same way that descriptors 1 and 20 of process A refer to the same open 
file description in Figure 5-2). This effect can be achieved using the <span class="docEmphasis">dup()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span> system calls.</p><p class="docText">Note that it is not sufficient for the shell simply to open the <tt>results.log</tt>
 file twice: once on descriptor 1 and once on descriptor 2. One reason 
for this is that the two file descriptors would not share a file offset 
pointer, and hence could end up overwriting each other’s output. Another
 reason is that the file may not be a disk file. Consider the following 
command, which sends standard error down the same pipe as standard 
output:</p><pre>$ <b>./myscript 2&gt;&amp;1 | less</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">dup()</span> call takes <span class="docEmphasis">oldfd</span>,
 an open file descriptor, and returns a new descriptor that refers to 
the same open file description. The new descriptor is guaranteed to be 
the lowest unused file descriptor.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

int <b>dup</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">oldfd</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns (new) file descriptor on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Suppose we make the following call:</p><pre>newfd = dup(1);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Assuming the normal situation
 where the shell has opened file descriptors 0, 1, and 2 on the 
program’s behalf, and no other descriptors are in use, <span class="docEmphasis">dup()</span> will create the duplicate of descriptor 1 using file 3.</p><p class="docText">If we wanted the duplicate to be descriptor 2, we could use the following technique:</p><pre>close(2);               /* Frees file descriptor 2 */
newfd = dup(1);         /* Should reuse file descriptor 2 */</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This code works only if 
descriptor 0 was open. To make the above code simpler, and to ensure we 
always get the file descriptor we want, we can use <span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

int <b>dup2</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">oldfd</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">newfd</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns (new) file descriptor on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span> system call makes a duplicate of the file descriptor given in <span class="docEmphasis">oldfd</span> using the descriptor number supplied in <span class="docEmphasis">newfd</span>. If the file descriptor specified in <span class="docEmphasis">newfd</span> is already open, <span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span> closes it first. (Any error that occurs during this close is silently ignored; safer programming practice is to explicitly <span class="docEmphasis">close() newfd</span> if it is open before the call to <span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span>.)</p><p class="docText">We could simplify the preceding calls to <span class="docEmphasis">close()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">dup()</span> to the following:</p><pre>dup2(1, 2);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">A successful <span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span> call returns the number of the duplicate descriptor (i.e., the value passed in <span class="docEmphasis">newfd</span>).</p><p class="docText">If <span class="docEmphasis">oldfd</span> is not a valid file descriptor, then <span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span> fails with the error <tt>EBADF</tt> and <span class="docEmphasis">newfd</span> is not closed. If <span class="docEmphasis">oldfd</span> is a valid file descriptor, and <span class="docEmphasis">oldfd</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">newfd</span> have the same value, then <span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span> does nothing—<span class="docEmphasis">newfd</span> is not closed, and <span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span> returns the <span class="docEmphasis">newfd</span> as its function result.</p><p class="docText">A further interface that provides some extra flexibility for duplicating file descriptors is the <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> <tt>F_DUPFD</tt> operation:</p><pre>newfd = fcntl(oldfd, F_DUPFD, startfd);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This call makes a duplicate of <span class="docEmphasis">oldfd</span> by using the lowest unused file descriptor greater than or equal to <span class="docEmphasis">startfd</span>. This is useful if we want a guarantee that the new descriptor (<span class="docEmphasis">newfd</span>) falls in a certain range of values. Calls to <span class="docEmphasis">dup()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span> can always be recoded as calls to <span class="docEmphasis">close()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>, although the former calls are more concise. (Note also that some of the <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> error codes returned by <span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> differ, as described in the manual pages.)</p><p class="docText">From Figure 5-2,
 we can see that duplicate file descriptors share the same file offset 
value and status flags in their shared open file description. However, 
the new file descriptor has its own set of file descriptor flags, and 
its close-on-exec flag (<tt>FD_CLOEXEC</tt>)
 is always turned off. The interfaces that we describe next allow 
explicit control of the new file descriptor’s close-on-exec flag.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">dup3()</span> system call performs the same task as <span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span>, but adds an additional argument, <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>, that is a bit mask that modifies the behavior of the system call.</p><pre>#define _GNU_SOURCE
#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

int <b>dup3</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">oldfd</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">newfd</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns (new) file descriptor on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Currently, <span class="docEmphasis">dup3()</span> supports one flag, <tt>O_CLOEXEC</tt>, which causes the kernel to enable the close-on-exec flag (<tt>FD_CLOEXEC</tt>) for the new file descriptor. This flag is useful for the same reasons as the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> <tt>O_CLOEXEC</tt> flag described in Section 4.3.1.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">dup3()</span> system call is new in Linux 2.6.27, and is Linux-specific.</p><p class="docText">Since Linux 2.6.24, Linux also supports an additional <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> operation for duplicating file descriptors: <tt>F_DUPFD_CLOEXEC</tt>. This flag does the same thing as <tt>F_DUPFD</tt>, but additionally sets the close-on-exec flag (<tt>FD_CLOEXEC</tt>) for the new file descriptor. Again, this operation is useful for the same reasons as the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> <tt>O_CLOEXEC</tt> flag. <tt>F_DUPFD_CLOEXEC</tt> is not specified in SUSv3, but is specified in SUSv4.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
