<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>5.8. Truncating a File: truncate() and ftruncate()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">5.8. Truncating a File: <span class="docEmphasis">truncate()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ftruncate()</span></h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">truncate()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ftruncate()</span> system calls set the size of a file to the value specified by <span class="docEmphasis">length</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

int <b>truncate</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, off_t <span class="docEmphasis">length</span>);
int <b>ftruncate</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, off_t <span class="docEmphasis">length</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Both return 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If the file is longer than <span class="docEmphasis">length</span>, the excess data is lost. If the file is currently shorter than <span class="docEmphasis">length</span>, it is extended by padding with a sequence of null bytes or a hole.</p><p class="docText">The difference between the two system calls lies in how the file is specified. With <span class="docEmphasis">truncate()</span>, the file, which must be accessible and writable, is specified as a pathname string. If <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> is a symbolic link, it is dereferenced. The <span class="docEmphasis">ftruncate()</span> system call takes a descriptor for a file that has been opened for writing. It doesn’t change the file offset for the file.</p><p class="docText">If the <span class="docEmphasis">length</span> argument to <span class="docEmphasis">ftruncate()</span>
 exceeds the current file size, SUSv3 allows two possible behaviors: 
either the file is extended (as on Linux) or the system call returns an 
error. XSI-conformant systems must adopt the former behavior. SUSv3 
requires that <span class="docEmphasis">truncate()</span> always extend the file if <span class="docEmphasis">length</span> is greater than the current file size.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">truncate()</span>
 system call is unique in being the only system call that can change the
 contents of a file without first obtaining a descriptor for the file 
via <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> (or by some other means).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
