<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>5.9. Nonblocking I/O</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">5.9. Nonblocking I/O</h3><p class="docText">Specifying the <tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt> flag when opening a file serves two purposes:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">If the file can’t be opened immediately, then <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> returns an error instead of blocking. One case where <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> can block is with FIFOs (Section 44.7).</p></li><li><p class="docList">After a successful <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>,
 subsequent I/O operations are also nonblocking. If an I/O system call 
can’t complete immediately, then either a partial data transfer is 
performed or the system call fails with one of the errors <tt>EAGAIN</tt> or <tt>EWOULDBLOCK</tt>.
 Which error is returned depends on the system call. On Linux, as on 
many UNIX implementations, these two error constants are synonymous.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Nonblocking
 mode can be used with devices (e.g., terminals and pseudoterminals), 
pipes, FIFOs, and sockets. (Because file descriptors for pipes and 
sockets are not obtained using <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>, we must enable this flag using the <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> <tt>F_SETFL</tt> operation described in Section 5.3.)</p><p class="docText"><tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt>
 is generally ignored for regular files, because the kernel buffer cache
 ensures that I/O on regular files does not block, as described in 
Section 13.1. However, <tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt> does have an effect for regular files when mandatory file locking is employed (Section 55.4).</p><p class="docText">We say more about nonblocking I/O in Section 44.9 and in Chapter 63.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Historically, System V-derived implementations provided the <tt>O_NDELAY</tt> flag, with similar semantics to <tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt>. The main difference was that a nonblocking <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> on System V returned 0 if a <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> could not be completed or if no input was available to satisfy a <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>. This behavior was problematic for <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> because it was indistinguishable from an end-of-file condition, and so the first POSIX.1 standard introduced <tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt>. Some UNIX implementations continue to provide the <tt>O_NDELAY</tt> flag with the old semantics. On Linux, the <tt>O_NDELAY</tt> constant is defined, but it is synonymous with <tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
