<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>5.10. I/O on Large Files</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">5.10. I/O on Large Files</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">off_t</span>
 data type used to hold a file offset is typically implemented as a 
signed long integer. (A signed data type is required because the value 
-1 is used for representing error conditions.) On 32-bit architectures 
(such as x86-32) this would limit the size of files to 2<sup>31</sup>–1 bytes (i.e., 2 GB).</p><p class="docText">However,
 the capacity of disk drives long ago exceeded this limit, and thus the 
need arose for 32-bit UNIX implementations to handle files larger than 
this size. Since this is a problem common to many implementations, a 
consortium of UNIX vendors cooperated on the <span class="docEmphasis">Large File Summit</span>
 (LFS), to enhance the SUSv2 specification with the extra functionality 
required to access large files. We outline the LFS enhancements in this 
section. (The complete LFS specification, finalized in 1996, can be 
found at http://opengroup.org/platform/lfs.html.)</p><p class="docText">Linux has provided LFS support on 32-bit systems since kernel 2.4 (<span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>
 2.2 or later is also required). In addition, the corresponding file 
system must also support large files. Most native Linux file systems 
provide this support, but some nonnative file systems do not (notable 
examples are Microsoft’s VFAT and NFSv2, both of which impose hard 
limits of 2 GB, regardless of whether the LFS extensions are employed).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Because
 long integers use 64 bits on 64-bit architectures (e.g., Alpha, IA-64),
 these architectures generally don’t suffer the limitations that the LFS
 enhancements were designed to address. Nevertheless, the implementation
 details of some native Linux file systems mean that the theoretical 
maximum size of a file may be less than 2<sup>63</sup>–1,
 even on 64-bit systems. In most cases, these limits are much higher 
than current disk sizes, so they don’t impose a practical limitation on 
file sizes.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">We can write applications requiring LFS functionality in one of two ways:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Use
 an alternative API that supports large files. This API was designed by 
the LFS as a “transitional extension” to the Single UNIX Specification. 
Thus, this API is not required to be present on systems conforming to 
SUSv2 or SUSv3, but many conforming systems do provide it. This approach
 is now obsolete.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Define the <tt>_FILE_OFFSET_BITS</tt>
 macro with the value 64 when compiling our programs. This is the 
preferred approach, because it allows conforming applications to obtain 
LFS functionality without making any source code changes.</p></li></ul><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETEBG">5.10.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EXEBG">5.10.1.1. The transitional LFS API</h5><p class="docText">To use the transitional LFS API, we must define the <tt>_LARGEFILE64_SOURCE</tt>
 feature test macro when compiling our program, either on the command 
line, or within the source file before including any header files. This 
API provides functions capable of handling 64-bit file sizes and 
offsets. These functions have the same names as their 32-bit 
counterparts, but have the suffix <span class="docEmphasis">64</span> appended to the function name. Among these functions are <span class="docEmphasis">fopen64()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">open64()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">lseek64()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">truncate64()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">stat64()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">mmap64()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">setrlimit64()</span>. (We’ve already described some of the 32-bit counterparts of these functions; others are described in later chapters.)</p><p class="docText">In
 order to access a large file, we simply use the 64-bit version of the 
function. For example, to open a large file, we could write the 
following:</p><pre>fd = open64(name, O_CREAT | O_RDWR, mode);
if (fd == -1)
    errExit("open");</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Calling <span class="docEmphasis">open64()</span> is equivalent to specifying the <tt>O_LARGEFILE</tt> flag when calling <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>. Attempts to open a file larger than 2 GB by calling <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> without this flag return an error.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">In addition to the aforementioned functions, the transitional LFS API adds some new data types, including:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">struct stat64</span>: an analog of the <span class="docEmphasis">stat</span> structure (Section 15.1) allowing for large file sizes.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">off64_t</span>: a 64-bit type for representing file offsets.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">off64_t</span> data type is used with (among others) the <span class="docEmphasis">lseek64()</span> function, as shown in Example 5-3.
 This program takes two command-line arguments: the name of a file to be
 opened and an integer value specifying a file offset. The program opens
 the specified file, seeks to the given file offset, and then writes a 
string. The following shell session demonstrates the use of the program 
to seek to a very large offset in the file (greater than 10 GB) and then
 write some bytes:</p><pre>$ <b>./large_file x 10111222333 </b>
$ <b>ls -l x </b>                                   <i> Check size of resulting file</i>
-rw-------    1 mtk      users    10111222337 Mar  4 13:34 x</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EMJBG">Example 5-3. Accessing large files</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>fileio/large_file.c</b>
#define _LARGEFILE64_SOURCE
#include &lt;sys/stat.h&gt;
#include &lt;fcntl.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int fd;
    off64_t off;

    if (argc != 3 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s pathname offset\n", argv[0]);

    fd = open64(argv[1], O_RDWR | O_CREAT, S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR);
    if (fd == -1)
        errExit("open64");

    off = atoll(argv[2]);
    if (lseek64(fd, off, SEEK_SET) == -1)
        errExit("lseek64");

    if (write(fd, "test", 4) == -1)
        errExit("write");
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
      <b>fileio/large_file.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EXJBG">5.10.1.2. The <tt>_FILE_OFFSET_BITS</tt> macro</h5><p class="docText">The recommended method of obtaining LFS functionality is to define the macro <tt>_FILE_OFFSET_BITS</tt> with the value 64 when compiling a program. One way to do this is via a command-line option to the C compiler:</p><pre>$ <b>cc -D_FILE_OFFSET_BITS=64 prog.c</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Alternatively, we can define this macro in the C source before including any header files:</p><pre>#define _FILE_OFFSET_BITS 64</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This automatically 
converts all of the relevant 32-bit functions and data types into their 
64-bit counterparts. Thus, for example, calls to <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> are actually converted into calls to <span class="docEmphasis">open64()</span>, and the <span class="docEmphasis">off_t</span>
 data type is defined to be 64 bits long. In other words, we can 
recompile an existing program to handle large files without needing to 
make any changes to the source code.</p><p class="docText">Using <tt>_FILE_OFFSET_BITS</tt>
 is clearly simpler than using the transitional LFS API, but this 
approach relies on applications being cleanly written (e.g., correctly 
using <span class="docEmphasis">off_t</span> to declare variables holding file offsets, rather than using a native C integer type).</p><p class="docText">The <tt>_FILE_OFFSET_BITS</tt>
 macro is not required by the LFS specification, which merely mentions 
this macro as an optional method of specifying the size of the <span class="docEmphasis">off_t</span> data type. Some UNIX implementations use a different feature test macro to obtain this functionality.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">If we attempt to access a large file using 32-bit functions (i.e., from a program compiled without setting <tt>_FILE_OFFSET_BITS</tt> to 64), then we may encounter the error <tt>EOVERFLOW</tt>. For example, this error can occur if we attempt to use the 32-bit version of <span class="docEmphasis">stat()</span> (Section 15.1) to retrieve information about a file whose size exceeds 2 GB.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EPMBG">5.10.1.3. Passing <span class="docEmphasis">off_t</span> values to <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span></h5><p class="docText">One problem that the LFS extensions don’t solve for us is how to pass <span class="docEmphasis">off_t</span> values to <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> calls. In Section 3.6.2, we noted that the portable method of displaying values of one of the predefined system data types (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">pid_t</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">uid_t</span>) was to cast that value to <span class="docEmphasis">long</span>, and use the <tt>%ld</tt> <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> specifier. However, if we are employing the LFS extensions, then this is often not sufficient for the <span class="docEmphasis">off_t</span> data type, because it may be defined as a type larger than <span class="docEmphasis">long</span>, typically <span class="docEmphasis">long long</span>. Therefore, to display a value of type <span class="docEmphasis">off_t</span>, we cast it to <span class="docEmphasis">long long</span> and use the <tt>%lld</tt> <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> specifier, as in the following:</p><pre>#define _FILE_OFFSET_BITS 64

off_t offset;           /* Will be 64 bits, the size of 'long long' */

/* Other code assigning a value to 'offset' */

printf("offset=%lld\n", (long long) offset);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Similar remarks also apply for the related <span class="docEmphasis">blkcnt_t</span> data type, which is employed in the <span class="docEmphasis">stat</span> structure (described in Section 15.1).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">If we are passing function arguments of the types <span class="docEmphasis">off_t</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">stat</span>
 between separately compiled modules, then we need to ensure that both 
modules use the same sizes for these types (i.e., either both were 
compiled with <tt>_FILE_OFFSET_BITS</tt> set to 64 or both were compiled without this setting).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
