<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>5.11. The /dev/fd Directory</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">5.11. The <tt>/dev/fd</tt> Directory</h3><p class="docText">For each process, the kernel provides the special virtual directory <tt>/dev/fd</tt>. This directory contains filenames of the form <tt>/dev/fd/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">n</span>, where <span class="docEmphasis">n</span> is a number corresponding to one of the open file descriptors for the process. Thus, for example, <tt>/dev/fd/0</tt> is standard input for the process. (The <tt>/dev/fd</tt> feature is not specified by SUSv3, but several other UNIX implementations provide this feature.)</p><p class="docText">Opening one of the files in the <tt>/dev/fd</tt> directory is equivalent to duplicating the corresponding file descriptor. Thus, the following statements are equivalent:</p><pre>fd = open("/dev/fd/1", O_WRONLY);
fd = dup(1);                        /* Duplicate standard output */</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> argument of the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> call <span class="docEmphasis">is</span>
 interpreted, so that we should take care to specify the same access 
mode as was used by the original descriptor. Specifying other flags, 
such as <tt>O_CREAT</tt>, is meaningless (and ignored) in this context.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText"><tt>/dev/fd</tt> is actually a symbolic link to the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/self/fd</tt> directory. The latter directory is a special case of the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/fd</tt> directories, each of which contains symbolic links corresponding to all of the files held open by a process.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The files in the <tt>/dev/fd</tt>
 directory are rarely used within programs. Their most common use is in 
the shell. Many user-level commands take filename arguments, and 
sometimes we would like to put them in a pipeline and have one of the 
arguments be standard input or output instead. For this purpose, some 
programs (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">diff</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ed</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">tar</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">comm</span>) have evolved the hack of using an argument consisting of a single hyphen (<tt>-</tt>) to mean “use standard input or output (as appropriate) for this filename argument.” Thus, to compare a file list from <span class="docEmphasis">ls</span> against a previously built file list, we might write the following:</p><pre>$ <b>ls | diff - oldfilelist</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This approach has 
various problems. First, it requires specific interpretation of the 
hyphen character on the part of each program, and many programs don’t 
perform such interpretation; they are written to work only with filename
 arguments, and they have no means of specifying standard input or 
output as the files with which they are to work. Second, some programs 
instead interpret a single hyphen as a delimiter marking the end of 
command-line options.</p><p class="docText">Using <tt>/dev/fd</tt>
 eliminates these difficulties, allowing the specification of standard 
input, output, and error as filename arguments to any program requiring 
them. Thus, we can write the previous shell command as follows:</p><pre>$ <b>ls | diff /dev/fd/0 oldfilelist</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">As a convenience, the names <tt>/dev/stdin</tt>, <tt>/dev/stdout</tt>, and <tt>/dev/stderr</tt> are provided as symbolic links to, respectively, <tt>/dev/fd/0</tt>, <tt>/dev/fd/1</tt>, and <tt>/dev/fd/2</tt>.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
