<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>5.12. Creating Temporary Files</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">5.12. Creating Temporary Files</h3><p class="docText">Some
 programs need to create temporary files that are used only while the 
program is running, and these files should be removed when the program 
terminates. For example, many compilers create temporary files during 
the compilation process. The GNU C library provides a range of library 
functions for this purpose. (The variety is, in part, a consequence of 
inheritance from various other UNIX implementations.) Here, we describe 
two of these functions: <span class="docEmphasis">mkstemp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfile()</span>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mkstemp()</span>
 function generates a unique filename based on a template supplied by 
the caller and opens the file, returning a file descriptor that can be 
used with I/O system calls.</p><pre>#include &lt;stdlib.h&gt;

int <b>mkstemp</b>(char *<span class="docEmphasis">template</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns file descriptor on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">template</span> argument takes the form of a pathname in which the last 6 characters must be <tt>XXXXXX</tt>. These 6 characters are replaced with a string that makes the filename unique, and this modified string is returned via the <span class="docEmphasis">template</span> argument. Because <span class="docEmphasis">template</span> is modified, it must be specified as a character array, rather than as a string constant.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mkstemp()</span>
 function creates the file with read and write permissions for the file 
owner (and no permissions for other users), and opens it with the <tt>O_EXCL</tt> flag, guaranteeing that the caller has exclusive access to the file.</p><p class="docText">Typically, a temporary file is unlinked (deleted) soon after it is opened, using the <span class="docEmphasis">unlink()</span> system call (Section 18.3). Thus, we could employ <span class="docEmphasis">mkstemp()</span> as follows:</p><pre>int fd;
char template[] = "/tmp/somestringXXXXXX";

fd = mkstemp(template);
if (fd == -1)
    errExit("mkstemp");
printf("Generated filename was: %s\n", template);
unlink(template);     /* Name disappears immediately, but the file
                         is removed only after close() */

/* Use file I/O system calls - read(), write(), and so on */

if (close(fd) == -1)
    errExit("close");</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">tmpnam()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">tempnam()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">mktemp()</span>
 functions can also be used to generate unique filenames. However, these
 functions should be avoided because they can create security holes in 
an application. See the manual pages for further details on these 
functions.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfile()</span> function creates a uniquely named temporary file that is opened for reading and writing. (The file is opened with the <tt>O_EXCL</tt> flag to guard against the unlikely possibility that another process has already created a file with the same name.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><pre>#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;

FILE *<b>tmpfile</b>(void);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns file pointer on success, or <tt>NULL</tt> on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">On success, <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfile()</span> returns a file stream that can be used with the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> library functions. The temporary file is automatically deleted when it is closed. To do this, <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfile()</span> makes an internal call to <span class="docEmphasis">unlink()</span> to remove the filename immediately after opening the file.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
