<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>5.13. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">5.13. Summary</h3><p class="docText">In
 the course of this chapter, we introduced the concept of atomicity, 
which is crucial to the correct operation of some system calls. In 
particular, the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> <tt>O_EXCL</tt> flag allows the caller to ensure that it is the creator of a file, and the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> <tt>O_APPEND</tt> flag ensures that multiple processes appending data to the same file don’t overwrite each other’s output.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>
 system call performs a variety of file control operations, including 
changing open file status flags and duplicating file descriptors. 
Duplicating file descriptors is also possible using <span class="docEmphasis">dup()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span>.</p><p class="docText">We
 looked at the relationship between file descriptors, open file 
descriptions, and file i-nodes, and noted that different information is 
associated with each of these three objects. Duplicate file descriptors 
refer to the same open file description, and thus share open file status
 flags and the file offset.</p><p class="docText">We described a number of system calls that extend the functionality of the conventional <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> system calls. The <span class="docEmphasis">pread()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">pwrite()</span> system calls perform I/O at a specified file location without changing the file offset. The <span class="docEmphasis">readv()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">writev()</span> calls perform scatter-gather I/O. The <span class="docEmphasis">preadv()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">pwritev()</span> calls combine scatter-gather I/O functionality with the ability to perform I/O at a specified file location.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">truncate()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ftruncate()</span>
 system calls can be used to decrease the size of a file, discarding the
 excess bytes, or to increase the size, padding with a zero-filled file 
hole.</p><p class="docText">We briefly introduced the concept of nonblocking I/O, and we’ll return to it in later chapters.</p><p class="docText">The
 LFS specification defines a set of extensions that allow processes 
running on 32-bit systems to perform operations on files whose size is 
too large to be represented in 32 bits.</p><p class="docText">The numbered files in the <tt>/dev/fd</tt>
 virtual directory allow a process to access its own open files via file
 descriptor numbers, which can be particularly useful in shell commands.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mkstemp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfile()</span> functions allow an application to create temporary files.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
