<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>5.14. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">5.14. Exercises</h3><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Modify the program in Example 5-3 to use standard file I/O system calls (<span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">lseek()</span>) and the <span class="docEmphasis">off_t</span> data type. Compile the program with the <tt>_FILE_OFFSET_BITS</tt> macro set to 64, and test it to show that a large file can be successfully created.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write a program that opens an existing file for writing with the <tt>O_APPEND</tt> flag, and then seeks to the beginning of the file before writing some data. Where does the data appear in the file? Why?</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">This exercise is designed to demonstrate why the atomicity guaranteed by opening a file with the <tt>O_APPEND</tt> flag is necessary. Write a program that takes up to three command-line arguments:</p><pre>$ <b>atomic_append </b> <i>filename num-bytes </i> [<i>x </i>]</pre><br/>
<p class="docList">This program should open the specified filename (creating it if necessary) and append <span class="docEmphasis">num-bytes</span> bytes to the file by using <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> to write a byte at a time. By default, the program should open the file with the <tt>O_APPEND</tt> flag, but if a third command-line argument (<span class="docEmphasis">x</span>) is supplied, then the <tt>O_APPEND</tt> flag should be omitted, and instead the program should perform an <span class="docEmphasis">lseek(fd, 0, SEEK_END)</span> call before each <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>. Run two instances of this program at the same time without the <span class="docEmphasis">x</span> argument to write 1 million bytes to the same file:</p><pre>$ <b>atomic_append f1 1000000 &amp; atomic_append f1 1000000</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docList">Repeat the same steps, writing to a different file, but this time specifying the <span class="docEmphasis">x</span> argument:</p><pre>$ <b>atomic_append f2 1000000 x &amp; atomic_append f2 1000000 x</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docList">List the sizes of the files <tt>f1</tt> and <tt>f2</tt> using <span class="docEmphasis">ls -l</span> and explain the difference.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Implement <span class="docEmphasis">dup()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span> using <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> and, where necessary, <span class="docEmphasis">close()</span>. (You may ignore the fact that <span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> return different <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> values for some error cases.) For <span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span>, remember to handle the special case where <span class="docEmphasis">oldfd</span> equals <span class="docEmphasis">newfd</span>. In this case, you should check whether <span class="docEmphasis">oldfd</span> is valid, which can be done by, for example, checking if <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl(oldfd, F_GETFL)</span> succeeds. If <span class="docEmphasis">oldfd</span> is not valid, then the function should return -1 with <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> set to <tt>EBADF</tt>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write a program to verify that duplicated file descriptors share a file offset value and open file status flags.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">After each of the calls to <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> in the following code, explain what the content of the output file would be, and why:</p><pre>fd1 = open(file, O_RDWR | O_CREAT | O_TRUNC, S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR);
fd2 = dup(fd1);
fd3 = open(file, O_RDWR);
write(fd1, "Hello,", 6);
write(fd2, " world", 6);
lseek(fd2, 0, SEEK_SET);
write(fd1, "HELLO,", 6);
write(fd3, "Gidday", 6);</pre><br/>
</div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Implement <span class="docEmphasis">readv()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">writev()</span> using <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>, and suitable functions from the <span class="docEmphasis">malloc</span> package (Section 7.1.2).</p></div></li></ol></div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
