<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>6.1. Processes and Programs</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">6.1. Processes and Programs</h3><p class="docText">A <span class="docEmphasis">process</span>
 is an instance of an executing program. In this section, we elaborate 
on this definition and clarify the distinction between a program and a 
process.</p><p class="docText">A <span class="docEmphasis">program</span>
 is a file containing a range of information that describes how to 
construct a process at run time. This information includes the 
following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Binary format identification</span>:
 Each program file includes metainformation describing the format of the
 executable file. This enables the kernel to interpret the remaining 
information in the file. Historically, two widely used formats for UNIX 
executable files were the original <span class="docEmphasis">a.out</span> (“assembler output”) format and the later, more sophisticated <span class="docEmphasis">COFF</span>
 (Common Object File Format). Nowadays, most UNIX implementations 
(including Linux) employ the Executable and Linking Format (ELF), which 
provides a number of advantages over the older formats.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Machine-language instructions</span>: These encode the algorithm of the program.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Program entry-point address</span>: This identifies the location of the instruction at which execution of the program should commence.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Data</span>: The program file contains values used to initialize variables and also literal constants used by the program (e.g., strings).</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Symbol and relocation tables:</span>
 These describe the locations and names of functions and variables 
within the program. These tables are used for a variety of purposes, 
including debugging and run-time symbol resolution (dynamic linking).</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Shared-library and dynamic-linking information</span>:
 The program file includes fields listing the shared libraries that the 
program needs to use at run time and the pathname of the dynamic linker 
that should be used to load these libraries.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Other information</span>: The program file contains various other information that describes how to construct a process.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">One program may be used to construct many processes, or, put conversely, many processes may be running the same program.</p><p class="docText">We
 can recast the definition of a process given at the start of this 
section as follows: a process is an abstract entity, defined by the 
kernel, to which system resources are allocated in order to execute a 
program.</p><p class="docText">From the kernel’s 
point of view, a process consists of user-space memory containing 
program code and variables used by that code, and a range of kernel data
 structures that maintain information about the state of the process. 
The information recorded in the kernel data structures includes various 
identifier numbers (IDs) associated with the process, virtual memory 
tables, the table of open file descriptors, information relating to 
signal delivery and handling, process resource usages and limits, the 
current working directory, and a host of other information.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
