<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>6.2. Process ID and Parent Process ID</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">6.2. Process ID and Parent Process ID</h3><p class="docText">Each
 process has a process ID (PID), a positive integer that uniquely 
identifies the process on the system. Process IDs are used and returned 
by a variety of system calls. For example, the <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span> system call (Section 20.5)
 allows the caller to send a signal to a process with a specific process
 ID. The process ID is also useful if we need to build an identifier 
that is unique to a process. A common example of this is the use of the 
process ID as part of a process-unique filename.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getpid()</span> system call returns the process ID of the calling process.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

pid_t <b>getpid</b>(void);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Always successfully returns process ID of caller</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pid_t</span> data type used for the return value of <span class="docEmphasis">getpid()</span> is an integer type specified by SUSv3 for the purpose of storing process IDs.</p><p class="docText">With the exception of a few system processes such as <span class="docEmphasis">init</span>
 (process ID 1), there is no fixed relationship between a program and 
the process ID of the process that is created to run that program.</p><p class="docText">The
 Linux kernel limits process IDs to being less than or equal to 32,767. 
When a new process is created, it is assigned the next sequentially 
available process ID. Each time the limit of 32,767 is reached, the 
kernel resets its process ID counter so that process IDs are assigned 
starting from low integer values.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Once
 it has reached 32,767, the process ID counter is reset to 300, rather 
than 1. This is done because many low-numbered process IDs are in 
permanent use by system processes and daemons, and thus time would be 
wasted searching for an unused process ID in this range.</p><p class="docText">In Linux 2.4 and earlier, the process ID limit of 32,767 is defined by the kernel constant <tt>PID_MAX</tt>.
 With Linux 2.6, things change. While the default upper limit for 
process IDs remains 32,767, this limit is adjustable via the value in 
the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/sys/kernel/pid_max</tt>
 file (which is one greater than the maximum process ID). On 32-bit 
platforms, the maximum value for this file is 32,768, but on 64-bit 
platforms, it can be adjusted to any value up to 222 (approximately 4 
million), making it possible to accommodate very large numbers of 
processes.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Each process has a parent—the process that created it. A process can find out the process ID of its parent using the <span class="docEmphasis">getppid()</span> system call.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

pid_t <b>getppid</b>(void);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Always successfully returns process ID of parent of caller</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">In
 effect, the parent process ID attribute of each process represents the 
tree-like relationship of all processes on the system. The parent of 
each process has its own parent, and so on, going all the way back to 
process 1, <span class="docEmphasis">init</span>, the ancestor of all processes. (This “family tree” can be viewed using the <span class="docEmphasis">pstree(1)</span> command.)</p><p class="docText">If a child process becomes orphaned because its “birth” parent terminates, then the child is adopted by the <span class="docEmphasis">init</span> process, and subsequent calls to <span class="docEmphasis">getppid()</span> in the child return 1 (see Section 26.2).</p><p class="docText">The parent of any process can be found by looking at the <tt>PPid</tt> field provided in the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/</tt><tt><i>PID</i></tt><tt>/status</tt> file.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
