<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>6.3. Memory Layout of a Process</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">6.3. Memory Layout of a Process</h3><p class="docText">The memory allocated to each process is composed of a number of parts, usually referred to as <span class="docEmphasis">segments</span>. These segments are as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">text segment</span>
 contains the machine-language instructions of the program run by the 
process. The text segment is made read-only so that a process doesn’t 
accidentally modify its own instructions via a bad pointer value. Since 
many processes may be running the same program, the text segment is made
 sharable so that a single copy of the program code can be mapped into 
the virtual address space of all of the processes.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">initialized data segment</span>
 contains global and static variables that are explicitly initialized. 
The values of these variables are read from the executable file when the
 program is loaded into memory.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">uninitialized data segment</span>
 contains global and static variables that are not explicitly 
initialized. Before starting the program, the system initializes all 
memory in this segment to 0. For historical reasons, this is often 
called the <span class="docEmphasis">bss</span>
 segment, a name derived from an old assembler mnemonic for “block 
started by symbol.” The main reason for placing global and static 
variables that are initialized into a separate segment from those that 
are uninitialized is that, when a program is stored on disk, it is not 
necessary to allocate space for the uninitialized data. Instead, the 
executable merely needs to record the location and size required for the
 uninitialized data segment, and this space is allocated by the program 
loader at run time.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">stack</span>
 is a dynamically growing and shrinking segment containing stack frames.
 One stack frame is allocated for each currently called function. A 
frame stores the function’s local variables (so-called automatic 
variables), arguments, and return value. Stack frames are discussed in 
more detail in Section 6.5.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">heap</span> is an area from which memory (for variables) can be dynamically allocated at run time. The top end of the heap is called the <span class="docEmphasis">program break</span>.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Less commonly used, but more descriptive labels for the initialized and uninitialized data segments are <span class="docEmphasis">user-initialized data segment</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">zero-initialized data segment</span>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">size(1)</span> command displays the size of the text, initialized data, and uninitialized data (<span class="docEmphasis">bss</span>) segments of a binary executable.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The term <span class="docEmphasis">segment</span>
 as used in the main text should not be confused with the hardware 
segmentation used on some hardware architectures such as x86-32. Rather,
 segments are logical divisions of a process’s virtual memory on UNIX 
systems. Sometimes, the term <span class="docEmphasis">section</span> is used instead of <span class="docEmphasis">segment</span>, since <span class="docEmphasis">section</span> is more consistent with the terminology used in the now ubiquitous ELF specification for executable file formats.</p><p class="docText">In
 many places in this book, we note that a library function returns a 
pointer to statically allocated memory. By this, we mean that the memory
 is allocated in either the initialized or the uninitialized data 
segment. (In some cases, the library function may instead do a one-time 
dynamic allocation of the memory on the heap; however, this 
implementation detail is irrelevant to the semantic point we describe 
here.) It is important to be aware of cases where a library function 
returns information via statically allocated memory, since that memory 
has an existence that is independent of the function invocation, and the
 memory may be overwritten by subsequent calls to the same function (or 
in some cases, by subsequent calls to related functions). The effect of 
using statically allocated memory is to render a function nonreentrant. 
We say more about reentrancy in Section 21.1.2 and Section 31.1.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Example 6-1
 shows various types of C variables along with comments indicating in 
which segment each variable is located. These comments assume a 
nonoptimizing compiler and an application binary interface in which all 
arguments are passed on the stack. In practice, an optimizing compiler 
may allocate frequently used variables in registers, or optimize a 
variable out of existence altogether. Furthermore, some ABIs require 
function arguments and the function result to be passed via registers, 
rather than on the stack. Nevertheless, this example serves to 
demonstrate the mapping between C variables and the segments of a 
process.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EZPBG">Example 6-1. Locations of program variables in process memory segments</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>proc/mem_segments.c</b>
#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;
#include &lt;stdlib.h&gt;

char globBuf[65536];            /* Uninitialized data segment */
int primes[] = { 2, 3, 5, 7 };  /* Initialized data segment */

static int
square(int x)                   /* Allocated in frame for square() */
{
    int result;                 /* Allocated in frame for square() */

    result = x * x;
    return result;              /* Return value passed via register */
}

static void
doCalc(int val)                 /* Allocated in frame for doCalc() */
{
    printf("The square of %d is %d\n", val, square(val));

    if (val &lt; 1000) {
        int t;                  /* Allocated in frame for doCalc() */

        t = val * val * val;
        printf("The cube of %d is %d\n", val, t);
    }
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])    /* Allocated in frame for main() */
{
    static int key = 9973;      /* Initialized data segment */
    static char mbuf[10240000]; /* Uninitialized data segment */
    char *p;                    /* Allocated in frame for main() */

    p = malloc(1024);           /* Points to memory in heap segment */

    doCalc(key);

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
      <b>proc/mem_segments.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">An <span class="docEmphasis">application binary interface</span>
 (ABI) is a set of rules specifying how a binary executable should 
exchange information with some service (e.g., the kernel or a library) 
at run time. Among other things, an ABI specifies which registers and 
stack locations are used to exchange this information, and what meaning 
is attached to the exchanged values. Once compiled for a particular ABI,
 a binary executable should be able to run on any system presenting the 
same ABI. This contrasts with a standardized API (such as SUSv3), which 
guarantees portability only for applications compiled from source code.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Although
 not specified in SUSv3, the C program environment on most UNIX 
implementations (including Linux) provides three global symbols: <span class="docEmphasis">etext</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">edata</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">end</span>.
 These symbols can be used from within a program to obtain the addresses
 of the next byte past, respectively, the end of the program text, the 
end of the initialized data segment, and the end of the uninitialized 
data segment. To make use of these symbols, we must explicitly declare 
them, as follows:</p><pre>extern char etext, edata, end;
        /* For example, &amp;etext gives the address of the end
           of the program text / start of initialized data */</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Figure 6-1 shows the arrangement of the various memory segments on the x86-32 architecture. The space labeled <span class="docEmphasis">argv, environ</span> at the top of this diagram holds the program command-line arguments (available in C via the <span class="docEmphasis">argv</span> argument of the <span class="docEmphasis">main()</span>
 function) and the process environment list (which we discuss shortly). 
The hexadecimal addresses shown in the diagram may vary, depending on 
kernel configuration and program linking options. The grayed-out areas 
represent invalid ranges in the process’s virtual address space; that 
is, areas for which page tables have not been created (see the following
 discussion of virtual memory management).</p><p class="docText">We revisit the topic of process memory layout in a little more detail in Section 48.5, where we consider where shared memory and shared libraries are placed in a process’s virtual memory.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
