<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>6.8. Performing a Nonlocal Goto: setjmp() and long jmp()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">6.8. Performing a Nonlocal Goto: <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">long jmp()</span></h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> library functions are used to perform a <span class="docEmphasis">nonlocal goto</span>. The term <span class="docEmphasis">nonlocal</span> refers to the fact that the target of the goto is a location somewhere outside the currently executing function.</p><p class="docText">Like many programming languages, C includes the <tt>goto</tt>
 statement, which is open to endless abuse in making programs difficult 
to read and maintain, and is occasionally useful to make a program 
simpler, faster, or both.</p><p class="docText">One restriction of C’s <tt>goto</tt>
 is that it is not possible to jump out of the current function into 
another function. However, such functionality can occasionally be 
useful. Consider the following common scenario in error handling: during
 a deeply nested function call, we encounter an error that should be 
handled by abandoning the current task, returning through multiple 
function calls, and then continuing execution in some much higher 
function (perhaps even <span class="docEmphasis">main()</span>).
 To do this, we could have each function return a status value that is 
checked and appropriately handled by its caller. This is perfectly 
valid, and, in many cases, the desirable method for handling this kind 
of scenario. However, in some cases, coding would be simpler if we could
 jump from the middle of the nested function call back to one of the 
functions that called it (the immediate caller, or the caller of the 
caller, and so on). This is the functionality that <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> provide.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The restriction that a <tt>goto</tt>
 can’t be used to jump between functions in C exists because all C 
functions reside at the same scope level (i.e., there is no nesting of 
function declarations in standard C, although <span class="docEmphasis">gcc</span>
 does permit this as an extension). Thus, given two functions, X and Y, 
the compiler has no way of knowing whether a stack frame for function X 
might be on the stack at the time Y is invoked, and thus whether a <tt>goto</tt> from function Y to function X would be possible. In languages such as Pascal, where function declarations can be nested, and a <tt>goto</tt>
 from a nested function to a function that encloses it is permitted, the
 static scope of a function allows the compiler to determine some 
information about the dynamic scope of the function. Thus, if function Y
 is lexically nested within function X, then the compiler knows that a 
stack frame for X must already be on the stack at the time Y is invoked,
 and can generate code for a <tt>goto</tt> from function Y to somewhere within function X.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><pre>#include &lt;setjmp.h&gt;

int <b>setjmp</b>(jmp_buf <span class="docEmphasis">env</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on initial call, nonzero on return via <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span></p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><pre>void <b>longjmp</b>(jmp_buf <span class="docEmphasis">env</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">val</span>);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Calling <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> establishes a target for a later jump performed by <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span>. This target is exactly the point in the program where the <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> call occurred. From a programming point of view, after the <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span>, it looks exactly as though we have just returned from the <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span>
 call for a second time. The way in which we distinguish the second 
“return” from the initial return is by the integer value returned by <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span>. The initial <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> returns 0, while the later “faked” return supplies whatever value is specified in the <span class="docEmphasis">val</span> argument of the <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> call. By using different values for the <span class="docEmphasis">val</span> argument, we can distinguish jumps to the same target from different points in the program.</p><p class="docText">Specifying the <span class="docEmphasis">val</span> argument to <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> as 0 would, if unchecked, cause the faked return from <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> to look as though it were the initial return. For this reason, if <span class="docEmphasis">val</span> is specified as 0, <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> actually uses the value 1.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">env</span> argument used by both functions supplies the glue enabling the jump to be accomplished. The <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> call saves various information about the current process environment into <span class="docEmphasis">env</span>. This allows the <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> call, which must specify the same <span class="docEmphasis">env</span> variable, to perform the fake return. Since the <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> calls are in different functions (otherwise, we could use a simple <tt>goto</tt>), <span class="docEmphasis">env</span> is declared globally or, less commonly, passed as a function argument.</p><p class="docText">Along with other information, <span class="docEmphasis">env</span> stores a copy of the <span class="docEmphasis">program counter</span> register (which points to the currently executing machine-language instruction) and the <span class="docEmphasis">stack pointer</span> register (which marks the top of the stack) at the time of the call to <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span>. This information enables the subsequent <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> call to accomplish two key steps:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Strip off the stack frames for all of the intervening functions on the stack between the function calling <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> and the function that previously called <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span>.
 This procedure is sometimes called “unwinding the stack,” and is 
accomplished by resetting the stack pointer register to the value saved 
in the <span class="docEmphasis">env</span> argument.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Reset the program counter register so that the program continues execution from the location of the initial <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> call. Again, this is accomplished using the value saved in <span class="docEmphasis">env</span>.</p></li></ul><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENYBG">6.8.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ERYBG">6.8.1.1. Example program</h5><p class="docText">Example 6-5 demonstrates the use of <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span>. This program sets up a jump target with an initial call to <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span>. The subsequent <tt>switch</tt> (on the value returned by <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span>) is the means of detecting whether we have just completed the initial return from <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> or whether we have arrived back after a <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span>. In the case of a 0 return—meaning we have just done the initial <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span>—we call <span class="docEmphasis">f1()</span>, which either immediately calls <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> or goes on to call <span class="docEmphasis">f2()</span>, depending on the value of <span class="docEmphasis">argc</span> (i.e., the number of command-line arguments). If <span class="docEmphasis">f2()</span> is reached, it does an immediate <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span>. A <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> from either function takes us back to the point of the <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> call. We use different <span class="docEmphasis">val</span> arguments in the two <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> calls, so that the <tt>switch</tt> statement in <span class="docEmphasis">main()</span> can determine the function from which the jump occurred and print a suitable message.</p><p class="docText">When we run the program in Example 6-5 without any command-line arguments, this is what we see:</p><pre>$ <b>./longjmp</b>

Calling f1() after initial setjmp()
We jumped back from f1()</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Specifying a command-line argument causes the jump to occur from <span class="docEmphasis">f 2()</span>:</p><pre>$ <b>./longjmp x</b>

Calling f1() after initial setjmp()
We jumped back from f2()</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EA2BG">Example 6-5. Demonstrate the use of <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>proc/longjmp.c</b>
#include &lt;setjmp.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

static jmp_buf env;

static void
f2(void)
{
    longjmp(env, 2);
}

static void
f1(int argc)
{
    if (argc == 1)
        longjmp(env, 1);
    f2();
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    switch (setjmp(env)) {
    case 0:     /* This is the return after the initial setjmp() */
        printf("Calling f1() after initial setjmp()\n");
        f1(argc);               /* Never returns... */
        break;                  /* ... but this is good form */

    case 1:
        printf("We jumped back from f1()\n");
        break;

    case 2:
        printf("We jumped back from f2()\n");
        break;
    }

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>proc/longjmp.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EP2BG">6.8.1.2. Restrictions on the use of <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span></h5><p class="docText">SUSv3 and C99 specify that a call to <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> may appear only in the following contexts:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">as the entire controlling expression of a selection or iteration statement (<tt>if</tt>, <tt>switch</tt>, <tt>while</tt>, and so on);</p></li><li><p class="docList">as the operand of a unary <tt>!</tt> (<span class="docEmphasis">not</span>) operator, where the resulting expression is the entire controlling expression of a selection or iteration statement;</p></li><li><p class="docList">as part of a comparison operation (<tt>==</tt>, <tt>!=</tt>, <tt>&lt;</tt>,
 and so on), where the other operand is an integer constant expression 
and the resulting expression is the entire controlling expression of a 
selection or iteration statement; or</p></li><li><p class="docList">as a free-standing function call that is not embedded inside some larger expression.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Note
 that the C assignment statement doesn’t figure in the list above. A 
statement of the following form is not standards-conformant:</p><pre>s = setjmp(env);                    /* WRONG! */</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">These restrictions are specified because an implementation of <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span>
 as a conventional function can’t be guaranteed to have enough 
information to be able to save the values of all registers and temporary
 stack locations used in an enclosing expression so that they could then
 be correctly restored after a <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span>. Thus, it is permitted to call <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> only inside expressions simple enough not to require temporary storage.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EE5BG">6.8.1.3. Abusing <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span></h5><p class="docText">If the <span class="docEmphasis">env</span> buffer is declared global to all functions (which is typical), then it is possible to execute the following sequence of steps:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Call a function <span class="docEmphasis">x()</span> that uses <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> to establish a jump target in the global variable <span class="docEmphasis">env</span>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Return from function <span class="docEmphasis">x()</span>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Call a function <span class="docEmphasis">y()</span> that does a <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> using <span class="docEmphasis">env</span>.</p></div></li></ol></div><p class="docText">This is a serious error. We can’t do a <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> into a function that has already returned. Considering what <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span>
 tries to do to the stack—it attempts to unwind the stack back to a 
frame that no longer exists—leads us to realize that chaos will result. 
If we are lucky, our program will simply crash. However, depending on 
the state of the stack, other possibilities include infinite call-return
 loops and the program behaving as though it really did return from a 
function that was not currently executing. (In a multithreaded program, a
 similar abuse is to call <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> in a different thread from that in which <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> was called.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">SUSv3 says that if <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span>
 is called from within a nested signal handler (i.e., a handler that was
 invoked while the handler for another signal was executing), then the 
program behavior is undefined.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EGAAI">6.8.1.4. Problems with optimizing compilers</h5><p class="docText">Optimizing
 compilers may rearrange the order of instructions in a program and 
store certain variables in CPU registers, rather than RAM. Such 
optimizations generally rely on the run-time flow of control reflecting 
the lexical structure of the program. Since jump operations performed 
via <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span>
 are established and executed at run time, and are not reflected in the 
lexical structure of the program, a compiler optimizer is unable to take
 them into account when performing its task. Furthermore, the semantics 
of some ABI implementations require <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> to restore copies of the CPU registers saved by the earlier <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> call. This means that optimized variables may end up with incorrect values as a consequence of a <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> operation. We can see an example of this by examining the behavior of the program in Example 6-6.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EPBAI">Example 6-6. A demonstration of the interaction of compiler optimization and <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>proc/setjmp_vars.c</b>
#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;
#include &lt;stdlib.h&gt;
#include &lt;setjmp.h&gt;

static jmp_buf env;

static void
doJump(int nvar, int rvar, int vvar)
{
    printf("Inside doJump(): nvar=%d rvar=%d vvar=%d\n", nvar, rvar, vvar);
    longjmp(env, 1);
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int nvar;
    register int rvar;          /* Allocated in register if possible */
    volatile int vvar;          /* See text */

    nvar = 111;
    rvar = 222;
    vvar = 333;

    if (setjmp(env) == 0) {     /* Code executed after setjmp() */
        nvar = 777;
        rvar = 888;
        vvar = 999;
        doJump(nvar, rvar, vvar);

    } else {                    /* Code executed after longjmp() */

        printf("After longjmp(): nvar=%d rvar=%d vvar=%d\n", nvar, rvar, vvar);
    }

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}

      <b>proc/setjmp_vars.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">When we compile the program in Example 6-6 normally, we see the expected output:</p><pre>$ <b>cc -o setjmp_vars setjmp_vars.c</b>

$ <b>./setjmp_vars</b>

Inside doJump(): nvar=777 rvar=888 vvar=999
After longjmp(): nvar=777 rvar=888 vvar=999</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">However, when we compile with optimization, we get the following unexpected results:</p><pre>$ <b>cc -O -o setjmp_vars setjmp_vars.c</b>

$ <b>./setjmp_vars</b>

Inside doJump(): nvar=777 rvar=888 vvar=999
After longjmp(): nvar=111 rvar=222 vvar=999</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Here, we see that after the <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">nvar</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">rvar</span> have been reset to their values at the time of the <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> call. This has occurred because the code reorganization performed by the optimizer has been confused as a consequence of the <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span>.
 Any local variables that are candidates for optimization may be subject
 to this sort of problem; this generally means pointer variables and 
variables of any of the simple types <span class="docEmphasis">char</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">int</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">float</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">long</span>.</p><p class="docText">We can prevent such code reorganization by declaring variables as <tt>volatile</tt>, which tells the optimizer not to optimize them. In the preceding program output, we see that the variable <span class="docEmphasis">vvar</span>, which was declared <tt>volatile</tt>, was correctly handled, even when we compiled with optimization.</p><p class="docText">Since different compilers do different types of optimizations, portable programs should employ the <tt>volatile</tt> keyword with all of the local variables of the aforementioned types in the function that calls <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span>.</p><p class="docText">If we specify the <span class="docEmphasis">-Wextra</span> (<span class="docEmphasis">extra warnings</span>) option to the GNU C compiler, it produces the following helpful warning for the <tt>setjmp_vars.c</tt> program:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>cc -Wall -Wextra -O -o setjmp_vars setjmp_vars.c</b>

setjmp_vars.c: In function `main':
setjmp_vars.c:17: warning: variable `nvar' might be clobbered by `longjmp' or `vfork'
setjmp_vars.c:18: warning: variable `rvar' might be clobbered by `longjmp' or `vfork'

					  </pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">It is instructive to look at the assembler output produced when compiling the <tt>setjmp_vars.c</tt> program both with and without optimization. The <span class="docEmphasis">cc -S</span> command produces a file with the extension <span class="docEmphasis">.s</span> containing the generated assembler code for a program.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EYEAI">6.8.1.5. Avoid <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">long jmp()</span> where possible</h5><p class="docText">If <tt>goto</tt>
 statements are capable of rendering a program difficult to read, then 
nonlocal gotos can make things an order of magnitude worse, since they 
can transfer control between any two functions in a program. For this 
reason, <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span>
 should be used sparingly. It is often worth the extra work in design 
and coding to come up with a program that avoids their use, because the 
program will be more readable and possibly more portable. Having said 
that, we revisit variants of these functions (<span class="docEmphasis">sigsetjmp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">siglongjmp()</span>, described in Section 21.2.1) when we discuss signals, since they are occasionally useful when writing signal handlers.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
