<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>6.9. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">6.9. Summary</h3><p class="docText">Each process has a unique process ID and maintains a record of its parent’s process ID.</p><p class="docText">The
 virtual memory of a process is logically divided into a number of 
segments: text, (initialized and uninitialized) data, stack, and heap.</p><p class="docText">The
 stack consists of a series of frames, with a new frame being added as a
 function is invoked and removed when the function returns. Each frame 
contains the local variables, function arguments, and call linkage 
information for a single function invocation.</p><p class="docText">The command-line arguments supplied when a program is invoked are made available via the <span class="docEmphasis">argc</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">argv</span> arguments to <span class="docEmphasis">main()</span>. By convention, <span class="docEmphasis">argv[0]</span> contains the name used to invoke the program.</p><p class="docText">Each process receives a copy of its parent’s environment list, a set of name-value pairs. The global variable <span class="docEmphasis">environ</span> and various library functions allow a process to access and modify the variables in its environment list.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span>
 functions provide a way to perform a nonlocal goto from one function to
 another (unwinding the stack). In order to avoid problems with compiler
 optimization, we may need to declare variables with the <tt>volatile</tt>
 modifier when making use of these functions. Nonlocal gotos can render a
 program difficult to read and maintain, and should be avoided whenever 
possible.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGVBG">6.9.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EKVBG">6.9.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">[Tanenbaum,
 2007] and [Vahalia, 1996] describe virtual memory management in detail.
 The Linux kernel memory management algorithms and code are described in
 detail in [Gorman, 2004].</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
