<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>7.2. Allocating Memory on the Stack: alloca()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">7.2. Allocating Memory on the Stack: <span class="docEmphasis">alloca()</span></h3><p class="docText">Like the functions in the <span class="docEmphasis">malloc</span> package, <span class="docEmphasis">alloca()</span> allocates memory dynamically. However, instead of obtaining memory from the heap, <span class="docEmphasis">alloca()</span>
 obtains memory from the stack by increasing the size of the stack 
frame. This is possible because the calling function is the one whose 
stack frame is, by definition, on the top of the stack. Therefore, there
 is space above the frame for expansion, which can be accomplished by 
simply modifying the value of the stack pointer.</p><pre>#include &lt;alloca.h&gt;

void *<b>alloca</b>(size_t <span class="docEmphasis">size</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns pointer to allocated block of memory</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">size</span> argument specifies the number of bytes to allocate on the stack. The <span class="docEmphasis">alloca()</span> function returns a pointer to the allocated memory as its function result.</p><p class="docText">We need not—indeed, must not—call <span class="docEmphasis">free()</span> to deallocate memory allocated with <span class="docEmphasis">alloca()</span>. Likewise, it is not possible to use <span class="docEmphasis">realloc()</span> to resize a block of memory allocated by <span class="docEmphasis">alloca()</span>.</p><p class="docText">Although <span class="docEmphasis">alloca()</span> is not part of SUSv3, it is provided on most UNIX implementations and is thus reasonably portable.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Older versions of <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>, and some other UNIX implementations (mainly BSD derivatives), require the inclusion of <tt>&lt;stdlib.h&gt;</tt> instead of <tt>&lt;alloca.h&gt;</tt> to obtain the declaration of <span class="docEmphasis">alloca()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If the stack overflows as a consequence of calling <span class="docEmphasis">alloca()</span>, then program behavior is unpredictable. In particular, we don’t get a <tt>NULL</tt> return to inform us of the error. (In fact, in this circumstance, we may receive a <tt>SIGSEGV</tt> signal. Refer to Section 21.3 for further details.)</p><p class="docText">Note that we can’t use <span class="docEmphasis">alloca()</span> within a function argument list, as in this example:</p><pre>func(x, alloca(size), z);           /* WRONG! */</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This is because the stack space allocated by <span class="docEmphasis">alloca()</span>
 would appear in the middle of the space for the function arguments 
(which are placed at fixed locations within the stack frame). Instead, 
we must use code such as this:</p><pre>void *y;

y = alloca(size);
func(x, y, z);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Using <span class="docEmphasis">alloca()</span> to allocate memory has a few advantages over <span class="docEmphasis">malloc()</span>. One of these is that allocating blocks of memory is faster with <span class="docEmphasis">alloca()</span> than with <span class="docEmphasis">malloc()</span>, because <span class="docEmphasis">alloca()</span> is implemented by the compiler as inline code that directly adjusts the stack pointer. Furthermore, <span class="docEmphasis">alloca()</span> doesn’t need to maintain a list of free blocks.</p><p class="docText">Another advantage of <span class="docEmphasis">alloca()</span>
 is that the memory that it allocates is automatically freed when the 
stack frame is removed; that is, when the function that called <span class="docEmphasis">alloca()</span>
 returns. This is so because the code executed during function return 
resets the value of the stack pointer register to the end of the 
previous frame (i.e., assuming a downwardly growing stack, to the 
address just above the start of the current frame). Since we don’t need 
to do the work of ensuring that allocated memory is freed on all return 
paths from a function, coding of some functions becomes much simpler.</p><p class="docText">Using <span class="docEmphasis">alloca()</span> can be especially useful if we employ <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> (Section 6.8) or <span class="docEmphasis">siglongjmp()</span> (Section 21.2.1)
 to perform a nonlocal goto from a signal handler. In this case, it is 
difficult or even impossible to avoid memory leaks if we allocated 
memory in the jumped-over functions using <span class="docEmphasis">malloc()</span>. By contrast, <span class="docEmphasis">alloca()</span> avoids this problem completely, since, as the stack is unwound by these calls, the allocated memory is automatically freed.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
