<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>8.1. The Password File: /etc/passwd</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">8.1. The Password File: <tt>/etc/passwd</tt></h3><p class="docText">The system <span class="docEmphasis">password file</span>, <tt>/etc/passwd</tt>, contains one line for each user account on the system. Each line is composed of seven fields separated by colons (<tt>:</tt>), as in the following example:</p><pre>mtk:x:1000:100:Michael Kerrisk:/home/mtk:/bin/bash</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In order, these fields are as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Login name</span>:
 This is the unique name that the user must enter in order to log in. 
Often, this is also called the username. We can also consider the login 
name to be the human-readable (symbolic) identifier corresponding to the
 numeric user identifier (described in a moment). Programs such as <span class="docEmphasis">ls(1)</span> display this name, rather than the numeric user ID associated with the file, when asked to show the ownership of a file (as in <span class="docEmphasis">ls -l</span>).</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Encrypted password</span>:
 This field contains a 13-character encrypted password, which we 
describe in more detail in Section 8.5. If the password field contains 
any other string—in particular, a string of other than 13 
characters—then logins to this account are disabled, since such a string
 can’t represent a valid encrypted password. Note, however, that this 
field is ignored if shadow passwords have been enabled (which is 
typical). In this case, the password field in <tt>etc/passwd</tt> conventionally contains the letter <span class="docEmphasis">x</span> (although any nonempty character string may appear), and the encrypted password is instead stored in the shadow password file (Section 8.2). If the password field in <tt>/etc/passwd</tt> is empty, then no password is required to log in to this account (this is true even if shadow passwords are enabled).</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Here,
 we assume that passwords are encrypted using Data Encryption Standard 
(DES), the historical and still widely used UNIX password-encryption 
scheme. It is possible to replace DES with other schemes, such as MD5, 
which produces a 128-bit <span class="docEmphasis">message digest</span> (a kind of hash) of its input. This value is stored as a 34-character string in the password (or shadow password) file.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">User ID</span>
 (UID): This is the numeric ID for this user. If this field has the 
value 0, then this account has superuser privileges. There is normally 
one such account, with the login name <span class="docEmphasis">root</span>.
 On Linux 2.2 and earlier, user IDs are maintained as 16-bit values, 
allowing the range 0 through to 65,535; on Linux 2.4 and later, they are
 stored using 32 bits, allowing a much larger range.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">It
 is possible (but unusual) to have more than one record in the password 
file with the same user ID, thus permitting multiple login names for the
 same user ID. This allows multiple users to access the same resources 
(e.g., files) using different passwords. The different login names can 
be associated with different sets of group IDs.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Group ID</span>
 (GID): This is the numeric ID of the first of the groups of which this 
user is a member. Further group memberships for this user are defined in
 the system group file.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Comment</span>: This field holds text about the user. This text is displayed by various programs, such as <span class="docEmphasis">finger(1)</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Home directory</span>: This is the initial directory into which the user is placed after logging in. This field becomes the value of the <tt>HOME</tt> environment variable.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Login shell</span>: This is the program to which control is transferred once the user is logged in. Usually, this is one of the shells, such as <span class="docEmphasis">bash</span>, but it can be any program. If this field is empty, then the login shell defaults to <tt>/bin/sh</tt>, the Bourne shell. This field becomes the value of the <tt>SHELL</tt> environment variable.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">On a stand-alone system, all the password information resides in the file <tt>/etc/passwd</tt>.
 However, if we are using a system such as Network Information System 
(NIS) or Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) to distribute 
passwords in a network environment, part or all of this information 
resides on a remote system. As long as programs accessing password 
information employ the functions described later in this chapter (<span class="docEmphasis">getpwnam()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">getpwuid()</span>,
 and so on), the use of NIS or LDAP is transparent to applications. 
Similar comments apply regarding the shadow password and group files 
discussed in the following sections.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
