<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>8.2. The Shadow Password File: /etc/shadow</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">8.2. The Shadow Password File: <tt>/etc/shadow</tt></h3><p class="docText">Historically, UNIX systems maintained all user information, including the encrypted password, in <tt>/etc/passwd</tt><a name="security problem"></a>.
 This presented a security problem. Since various unprivileged system 
utilities needed to have read access to other information in the 
password file, it had to be made readable to all users. This opened the 
door for password-cracking programs, which try encrypting large lists of
 likely passwords (e.g., standard dictionary words or people’s names) to
 see if they match the encrypted password of a user. The <span class="docEmphasis">shadow password file</span>, <tt>/etc/shadow</tt>,
 was devised as a method of preventing such attacks. The idea is that 
all of the nonsensitive user information resides in the publicly 
readable password file, while encrypted passwords are maintained in the 
shadow password file, which is readable only by privileged programs.</p><p class="docText">In
 addition to the login name, which provides the match to the 
corresponding record in the password file, and the encrypted password, 
the shadow password file also contains a number of other 
security-related fields. Further details on these fields can be found in
 the <span class="docEmphasis">shadow(5)</span> 
manual page. We’ll concern ourselves mainly with the encrypted password 
field, which we discuss in greater detail when looking at the <span class="docEmphasis">crypt()</span> library function later in Section 8.5.</p><p class="docText">SUSv3
 doesn’t specify shadow passwords. Not all UNIX implementations provide 
this feature, and on implementations where it is provided the details of
 the file locations and APIs vary.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
