<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>8.3. The Group File: /etc/group</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">8.3. The Group File: <tt>/etc/group</tt></h3><p class="docText">For
 various administrative purposes, in particular, controlling access to 
files and other system resources, it is useful to organize users into <span class="docEmphasis">groups</span>.</p><p class="docText">The
 set of groups to which a user belongs is defined by the combination of 
the group ID field in the user’s password entry and the groups under 
which the user is listed in the group file. This strange split of 
information across two files is historical in origin. In early UNIX 
implementations, a user could be a member of only one group at a time. A
 user’s initial group membership at login was determined by the group ID
 field of the password file and could be changed thereafter using the <span class="docEmphasis">newgrp(1)</span>
 command, which required the user to supply the group password (if the 
group was password protected). 4.2BSD introduced the concept of multiple
 simultaneous group memberships, which was later standardized in 
POSIX.1-1990. Under this scheme, the group file listed the extra group 
memberships of each user. (The <span class="docEmphasis">groups(1)</span>
 command displays the groups of which the shell process is a member, or,
 if one or more usernames are supplied as command-line arguments, then 
the group memberships of those users.)</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">group file</span>, <tt>/etc/group</tt>,
 contains one line for each group in the system. Each line consists of 
four colon-separated fields, as in the following examples:</p><pre>users:x:100:
jambit:x:106:claus,felli,frank,harti,markus,martin,mtk,paul</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In order, these fields are as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Group name</span>:
 This is the name of the group. Like the login name in the password 
file, we can consider this to be the human-readable (symbolic) 
identifier corresponding to the numeric group identifier.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Encrypted password</span>:
 This field contains an optional password for the group. With the advent
 of multiple group memberships, group passwords are nowadays rarely used
 on UNIX systems. Nevertheless, it is possible to place a password on a 
group (a privileged user can do this using the <span class="docEmphasis">gpasswd</span> command). If a user is not a member of the group, <span class="docEmphasis">newgrp(1)</span>
 requests this password before starting a new shell whose group 
memberships include that group. If password shadowing is enabled, then 
this field is ignored (in this case, conventionally it contains just the
 letter <span class="docEmphasis">x</span>, but any string, including an empty string, may appear) and the encrypted passwords are actually kept in the <span class="docEmphasis">shadow group file</span>, <tt>/etc/gshadow</tt>,
 which can be accessed only by privileged users and programs. Group 
passwords are encrypted in a similar fashion to user passwords (Section 8.5).</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Group ID</span> (GID): This is the numeric ID for this group. There is normally one group defined with the group ID 0, named <span class="docEmphasis">root</span> (like the <tt>/etc/passwd</tt>
 record with user ID of 0, but unlike the user ID 0, this group has no 
special privileges). On Linux 2.2 and earlier, group IDs are maintained 
as 16-bit values, allowing the range 0 through to 65,535; on Linux 2.4 
and later, they are stored using 32 bits.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">User list</span>:
 This is a comma-separated list of names of users who are members of 
this group. (This list consists of usernames rather than user IDs, 
since, as noted earlier, user IDs are not necessarily unique in the 
password file.)</p></li></ul><p class="docText">To record that the user <span class="docEmphasis">avr</span> is a member of the groups <span class="docEmphasis">users</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">staff</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">teach</span>, we would see the following record in the password file:</p><pre>avr:x:1001:100:Anthony Robins:/home/avr:/bin/bash</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">And the following records would appear in the group file:</p><pre>users:x:100:
staff:x:101:mtk,avr,martinl
teach:x:104:avr,rlb,alc</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The fourth field of the password record, containing the group ID 100, specifies membership of the group <span class="docEmphasis">users</span>. The remaining group memberships are indicated by listing <span class="docEmphasis">avr</span> once in each of the relevant records in the group file.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
