<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>8.4. Retrieving User and Group Information</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">8.4. Retrieving User and Group Information</h3><p class="docText">In
 this section, we look at library functions that permit us to retrieve 
individual records from the password, shadow password, and group files, 
and to scan all of the records in each of these files.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EV6BG">8.4.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EZ6BG">8.4.1.1. Retrieving records from the password file</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getpwnam()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getpwuid()</span> functions retrieve records from the password file.</p><pre>#include &lt;pwd.h&gt;

struct passwd *<b>getpwnam</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">name</span>);
struct passwd *<b>getpwuid</b>(uid_t <span class="docEmphasis">uid</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Both return a pointer on success, or <tt>NULL</tt> on error; see main text for description of the “not found” case</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Given a login name in <span class="docEmphasis">name</span>, the <span class="docEmphasis">getpwnam()</span>
 function returns a pointer to a structure of the following type, 
containing the corresponding information from the password record:</p><pre>struct passwd {
    char *pw_name;      /* Login name (username) */
    char *pw_passwd;    /* Encrypted password */
    uid_t pw_uid;       /* User ID */
    gid_t pw_gid;       /* Group ID */
    char *pw_gecos;     /* Comment (user information) */
    char *pw_dir;       /* Initial working (home) directory */
    char *pw_shell;     /* Login shell */
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pw_gecos</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">pw_passwd</span> fields of the <span class="docEmphasis">passwd</span> structure are not defined in SUSv3, but are available on all UNIX implementations. The <span class="docEmphasis">pw_passwd</span>
 field contains valid information only if password shadowing is not 
enabled. (Programmatically, the simplest way to determine whether 
password shadowing is enabled is to follow a successful <span class="docEmphasis">getpwnam()</span> call with a call to <span class="docEmphasis">getspnam()</span>,
 described shortly, to see if it returns a shadow password record for 
the same username.) Some other implementations provide additional, 
nonstandard fields in this structure.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pw_gecos</span>
 field derives its name from early UNIX implementations, where this 
field contained information that was used for communicating with a 
machine running the General Electric Comprehensive Operating System 
(GECOS). Although this usage has long since become obsolete, the field 
name has survived, and the field is used for recording information about
 the user.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getpwuid()</span> function returns exactly the same information as <span class="docEmphasis">getpwnam()</span>, but does a lookup using the numeric user ID supplied in the argument <span class="docEmphasis">uid</span>.</p><p class="docText">Both <span class="docEmphasis">getpwnam()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getpwuid()</span>
 return a pointer to a statically allocated structure. This structure is
 overwritten on each call to either of these functions (or to the <span class="docEmphasis">getpwent()</span> function described below).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Because they return a pointer to statically allocated memory, <span class="docEmphasis">getpwnam()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getpwuid()</span> are not reentrant. In fact, the situation is even more complex, since the returned <span class="docEmphasis">passwd</span> structure contains pointers to other information (e.g., the <span class="docEmphasis">pw_name</span> field) that is also statically allocated. (We explain reentrancy in Section 21.1.2.) Similar statements apply to the <span class="docEmphasis">getgrnam()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getgrgid()</span> functions (described shortly).</p><p class="docText">SUSv3 specifies an equivalent set of reentrant functions—<span class="docEmphasis">getpwnam_r()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">getpwuid_r()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">getgrnam_r()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">getgrgid_r()</span>—that include as arguments both a <span class="docEmphasis">passwd</span> (or <span class="docEmphasis">group</span>) structure and a buffer area to hold the other structures to which the fields of the <span class="docEmphasis">passwd (group)</span> structure point. The number of bytes required for this additional buffer can be obtained using the call <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf(_SC_GETPW_R_SIZE_MAX)</span> (or <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf(_SC_GETGR_R_SIZE_MAX)</span> in the case of the group-related functions). See the manual pages for details of these functions.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">According to SUSv3, if a matching <span class="docEmphasis">passwd</span> record can’t be found, then <span class="docEmphasis">getpwnam()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getpwuid()</span> should return <tt>NULL</tt> and leave <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>
 unchanged. This means that we should be able to distinguish the error 
and the “not found” cases using code such as the following:</p><pre>struct passwd *pwd;

errno = 0;
pwd = getpwnam(name);
if (pwd == NULL) {
    if (errno == 0)
        /* Not found */;
    else
        /* Error */;
 }</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">However, a number of UNIX implementations don’t conform to SUSv3 on this point. If a matching <span class="docEmphasis">passwd</span> record is not found, then these functions return <tt>NULL</tt> and set <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> to a nonzero value, such as <tt>ENOENT</tt> or <tt>ESRCH</tt>. Before version 2.7, <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> produced the error <tt>ENOENT</tt> for this case, but since version 2.7, <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>
 conforms to the SUSv3 requirements. This variation across 
implementations arises in part because POSIX.1-1990 did not require 
these functions to set <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> on error and allowed them to set <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>
 for the “not found” case. The upshot of all of this is that it isn’t 
really possible to portably distinguish the error and “not found” cases 
when using these functions.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EIHAI">8.4.1.2. Retrieving records from the group file</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getgrnam()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getgrgid()</span> functions retrieve records from the group file.</p><pre>#include &lt;grp.h&gt;
struct group *<b>getgrnam</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">name</span>);
struct group *<b>getgrgid</b>(gid_t <span class="docEmphasis">gid</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Both return a pointer on success, or <tt>NULL</tt> on error; see main text for description of the “not found” case</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getgrnam()</span> function looks up group information by group name, and the <span class="docEmphasis">getgrgid()</span> function performs lookups by group ID. Both functions return a pointer to a structure of the following type:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">struct group {
    char  *gr_name;     /* Group name */
    char  *gr_passwd;   /* Encrypted password (if not password shadowing) */
    gid_t  gr_gid;      /* Group ID */
    char **gr_mem;      /* NULL-terminated array of pointers to names
                           of members listed in /etc/group */
};

					  </pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">gr_passwd</span> field of the <span class="docEmphasis">group</span> structure is not specified in SUSv3, but is available on most UNIX implementations.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">As
 with the corresponding password functions described above, this 
structure is overwritten on each call to one of these functions.</p><p class="docText">If these functions can’t find a matching <span class="docEmphasis">group</span> record, then they show the same variations in behavior that we described for <span class="docEmphasis">getpwnam()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getpwuid()</span>.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EYKAI">8.4.1.3. Example program</h5><p class="docText">One
 common use of the functions that we have already described in this 
section is to convert symbolic user and group names into numeric IDs and
 vice versa. Example 8-1 demonstrates these conversions, in the form of four functions: <span class="docEmphasis">userNameFromId()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">userIdFromName()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">groupNameFromId()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">groupIdFromName()</span>. As a convenience to the caller, <span class="docEmphasis">userIdFromName()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">groupIdFromName()</span> also allow the <span class="docEmphasis">name</span>
 argument to be a (purely) numeric string; in that case, the string is 
converted directly to a number and returned to the caller. We employ 
these functions in some example programs later in this book.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EWNAI">Example 8-1. Functions to convert user and group IDs to and from user and group names</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>users_groups/ugid_functions.c</b>
#include &lt;pwd.h&gt;
#include &lt;grp.h&gt;
#include &lt;ctype.h&gt;
#include "ugid_functions.h"     /* Declares functions defined here */

char *          /* Return name corresponding to 'uid', or NULL on error */
userNameFromId(uid_t uid)
{
    struct passwd *pwd;

    pwd = getpwuid(uid);
    return (pwd == NULL) ? NULL : pwd-&gt;pw_name;
}

uid_t           /* Return UID corresponding to 'name', or -1 on error */
userIdFromName(const char *name)
{
    struct passwd *pwd;
    uid_t u;
    char *endptr;

    if (name == NULL || *name == '\0')  /* On NULL or empty string */
        return -1;                      /* return an error */

    u = strtol(name, &amp;endptr, 10);      /* As a convenience to caller */
    if (*endptr == '\0')                /* allow a numeric string */
        return u;

    pwd = getpwnam(name);
    if (pwd == NULL)
        return -1;

    return pwd-&gt;pw_uid;
}

char *          /* Return name corresponding to 'gid', or NULL on error */
groupNameFromId(gid_t gid)
{
    struct group *grp;

    grp = getgrgid(gid);
    return (grp == NULL) ? NULL : grp-&gt;gr_name;
}

gid_t           /* Return GID corresponding to 'name', or -1 on error */
groupIdFromName(const char *name)
{
    struct group *grp;
    gid_t g;
    char *endptr;

    if (name == NULL || *name == '\0')  /* On NULL or empty string */
        return -1;                      /* return an error */

    g = strtol(name, &amp;endptr, 10);      /* As a convenience to caller */
    if (*endptr == '\0')                /* allow a numeric string */
        return g;

    grp = getgrnam(name);
    if (grp == NULL)
        return -1;

    return grp-&gt;gr_gid;
}
     <b>users_groups/ugid_functions.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EBOAI">8.4.1.4. Scanning all records in the password and group files</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">setpwent()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">getpwent()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">endpwent()</span> functions are used to perform sequential scans of the records in the password file.</p><pre>#include &lt;pwd.h&gt;

struct passwd *<b>getpwent</b>(void);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns pointer on success, or <tt>NULL</tt> on end of stream or error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><pre>void <b>setpwent</b>(void);
void <b>endpwent</b>(void);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getpwent()</span> function returns records from the password file one by one, returning <tt>NULL</tt> when there are no more records (or an error occurs). On the first call, <span class="docEmphasis">getpwent()</span> automatically opens the password file. When we have finished with the file, we call <span class="docEmphasis">endpwent()</span> to close it.</p><p class="docText">We can walk through the entire password file printing login names and user IDs with the following code:</p><pre>struct passwd *pwd;

while ((pwd = getpwent()) != NULL)
    printf("%-8s %5ld\n", pwd-&gt;pw_name, (long) pwd-&gt;pw_uid);

endpwent();</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">endpwent()</span> call is necessary so that any subsequent <span class="docEmphasis">getpwent()</span>
 call (perhaps in some other part of our program or in some library 
function that we call) will reopen the password file and start from the 
beginning. On the other hand, if we are part-way through the file, we 
can use the <span class="docEmphasis">setpwent()</span> function to restart from the beginning.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getgrent()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">setgrent()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">endgrent()</span>
 functions perform analogous tasks for the group file. We omit the 
prototypes for these functions because they are similar to those of the 
password file functions described above; see the manual pages for 
details.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EUSAI">8.4.1.5. Retrieving records from the shadow password file</h5><p class="docText">The
 following functions are used to retrieve individual records from the 
shadow password file and to scan all records in that file.</p><pre>#include &lt;shadow.h&gt;

struct spwd *<b>getspnam</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">name</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns pointer on success, or <tt>NULL</tt> on not found or error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><pre>struct spwd *<b>getspent</b>(void);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns pointer on success, or <tt>NULL</tt> on end of stream or error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><pre>void <b>setspent</b>(void);
void <b>endspent</b>(void);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We won’t describe these 
functions in detail, since their operation is similar to the 
corresponding password file functions. (These functions aren’t specified
 in SUSv3, and aren’t present on all UNIX implementations.)</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getspnam()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getspent()</span> functions return pointers to a structure of type <span class="docEmphasis">spwd</span>. This structure has the following form:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">struct spwd {
    char *sp_namp;          /* Login name (username) */
    char *sp_pwdp;          /* Encrypted password */

    /* Remaining fields support "password aging", an optional
       feature that forces users to regularly change their
       passwords, so that even if an attacker manages to obtain
       a password, it will eventually cease to be usable. */

    long sp_lstchg;         /* Time of last password change
                               (days since 1 Jan 1970) */
    long sp_min;            /* Min. number of days between password changes */
    long sp_max;            /* Max. number of days before change required */
    long sp_warn;           /* Number of days beforehand that user is
                               warned of upcoming password expiration */
    long sp_inact;          /* Number of days after expiration that account
                               is considered inactive and locked */
    long sp_expire;         /* Date when account expires
                               (days since 1 Jan 1970) */
    unsigned long sp_flag;  /* Reserved for future use */
};

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We demonstrate the use of <span class="docEmphasis">getspnam()</span> in Example 8-2.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
