<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>8.5. Password Encryption and User Authentication</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">8.5. Password Encryption and User Authentication</h3><p class="docText">Some
 applications require that users authenticate themselves. Authentication
 typically takes the form of a username (login name) and password. An 
application may maintain its own database of usernames and passwords for
 this purpose. Sometimes, however, it is necessary or convenient to 
allow users to enter their standard username and password as defined in <tt>/etc/passwd</tt> and <tt>/etc/shadow</tt>.
 (For the remainder of this section, we assume a system where password 
shadowing is enabled, and thus that the encrypted password is stored in <tt>/etc/shadow</tt>.) Network applications that provide some form of login to a remote system, such as <span class="docEmphasis">ssh</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ftp</span>,
 are typical examples of such programs. These applications must validate
 a username and password in the same way that the standard <span class="docEmphasis">login</span> program does.</p><p class="docText">For security reasons, UNIX systems encrypt passwords using a <span class="docEmphasis">one-way encryption</span>
 algorithm, which means that there is no method of re-creating the 
original password from its encrypted form. Therefore, the only way of 
validating a candidate password is to encrypt it using the same method 
and see if the encrypted result matches the value stored in <tt>/etc/shadow</tt>. The encryption algorithm is encapsulated in the <span class="docEmphasis">crypt()</span> function.</p><pre>#define _XOPEN_SOURCE
#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

char *<b>crypt</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">key</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">salt</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns pointer to statically allocated string containing encrypted password on success, or <tt>NULL</tt> on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">crypt()</span> algorithm takes a <span class="docEmphasis">key</span> (i.e., a password) of up to 8 characters, and applies a variation of the Data Encryption Standard (DES) algorithm to it. The <span class="docEmphasis">salt</span>
 argument is a 2-character string whose value is used to perturb (vary) 
the algorithm, a technique designed to make it more difficult to crack 
the encrypted password. The function returns a pointer to a statically 
allocated 13-character string that is the encrypted password.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Details of DES can be found at http://www.itl.nist.gov/fipspubs/fip46-2.htm.
 As noted earlier, other algorithms may be used instead of DES. For 
example, MD5 yields a 34-character string starting with a dollar sign (<tt>$</tt>), which allows <span class="docEmphasis">crypt()</span> to distinguish DES-encrypted passwords from MD5-encrypted passwords.</p><p class="docText">In
 our discussion of password encryption, we are using the word 
“encryption” somewhat loosely. Accurately, DES uses the given password 
string as an encryption key to encode a fixed bit string, while MD5 is a
 complex type of hashing function. The result in both cases is the same:
 an undecipherable and irreversible transformation of the input 
password.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Both the <span class="docEmphasis">salt</span> argument and the encrypted password are composed of characters selected from the 64-character set <tt>[a-zA-Z0-9/.]</tt>. Thus, the 2-character <span class="docEmphasis">salt</span>
 argument can cause the encryption algorithm to vary in any of 64 * 64 =
 4096 different ways. This means that instead of preencrypting an entire
 dictionary and checking the encrypted password against all words in the
 dictionary, a cracker would need to check the password against 4096 
encrypted versions of the dictionary.</p><p class="docText">The encrypted password returned by <span class="docEmphasis">crypt()</span> contains a copy of the original <span class="docEmphasis">salt</span> value as its first two characters. This means that when encrypting a candidate password, we can obtain the appropriate <span class="docEmphasis">salt</span> value from the encrypted password value already stored in <tt>/etc/shadow</tt>. (Programs such as <span class="docEmphasis">passwd(1)</span> generate a random <span class="docEmphasis">salt</span> value when encrypting a new password.) In fact, the <span class="docEmphasis">crypt()</span> function ignores any characters in the <span class="docEmphasis">salt</span> string beyond the first two. Therefore, we can specify the encrypted password itself as the <span class="docEmphasis">salt</span> argument.</p><p class="docText">In order to use <span class="docEmphasis">crypt()</span> on Linux, we must compile programs with the <span class="docEmphasis">-lcrypt</span> option, so that they are linked against the <span class="docEmphasis">crypt</span> library.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EBGAI">8.5.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EFGAI">8.5.1.1. Example program</h5><p class="docText">Example 8-2 demonstrates how to use <span class="docEmphasis">crypt()</span>
 to authenticate a user. This program first reads a username and then 
retrieves the corresponding password record and (if it exists) shadow 
password record. The program prints an error message and exits if no 
password record is found, or if the program doesn’t have permission to 
read from the shadow password file (this requires either superuser 
privilege or membership of the <span class="docEmphasis">shadow</span> group). The program then reads the user’s password, using the <span class="docEmphasis">getpass()</span> function.</p><pre>#define _BSD_SOURCE
#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;
char *<b>getpass</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">prompt</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns pointer to statically allocated input password string on success, or <tt>NULL</tt> on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getpass()</span> function first disables echoing and all processing of terminal special characters (such as the <span class="docEmphasis">interrupt</span> character, normally <span class="docEmphasis">Control-C</span>). (We explain how to change these terminal settings in Chapter 62.) It then prints the string pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">prompt</span>,
 and reads a line of input, returning the null-terminated input string 
with the trailing newline stripped, as its function result. (This string
 is statically allocated, and so will be overwritten on a subsequent 
call to <span class="docEmphasis">getpass()</span>.) Before returning, <span class="docEmphasis">getpass()</span> restores the terminal settings to their original states.</p><p class="docText">Having read a password with <span class="docEmphasis">getpass()</span>, the program in Example 8-2 then validates that password by using <span class="docEmphasis">crypt()</span>
 to encrypt it and checking that the resulting string matches the 
encrypted password recorded in the shadow password file. If the password
 matches, then the ID of the user is displayed, as in the following 
example:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>su </b>                            <i> Need privilege to read shadow password file</i>

Password:
# <b>./check_password </b>

Username: <b>mtk </b>

Password:                       <i> We type in password, which is not echoed</i>

Successfully authenticated: UID=1000

					  </pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The program in Example 8-2 sizes the character array holding a username using the value returned by <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf(_SC_LOGIN_NAME_MAX)</span>, which yields the maximum size of a username on the host system. We explain the use of <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span> in Section 11.2.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ECLAI">Example 8-2. Authenticating a user against the shadow password file</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>users_groups/check_password.c</b>
#define _BSD_SOURCE     /* Get getpass() declaration from &lt;unistd.h&gt; */
#define _XOPEN_SOURCE   /* Get crypt() declaration from &lt;unistd.h&gt; */
#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;
#include &lt;limits.h&gt;
#include &lt;pwd.h&gt;
#include &lt;shadow.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    char *username, *password, *encrypted, *p;
    struct passwd *pwd;
    struct spwd *spwd;
    Boolean authOk;
    size_t len;
    long lnmax;

    lnmax = sysconf(_SC_LOGIN_NAME_MAX);
    if (lnmax == -1)                    /* If limit is indeterminate */
        lnmax = 256;                    /* make a guess */

    username = malloc(lnmax);
    if (username == NULL)
        errExit("malloc");

    printf("Username: ");
    fflush(stdout);
    if (fgets(username, lnmax, stdin) == NULL)
        exit(EXIT_FAILURE);             /* Exit on EOF */

    len = strlen(username);
    if (username[len - 1] == '\n')
        username[len - 1] = '\0';       /* Remove trailing '\n' */

    pwd = getpwnam(username);
    if (pwd == NULL)
        fatal("couldn't get password record");
    spwd = getspnam(username);
    if (spwd == NULL &amp;&amp; errno == EACCES)
        fatal("no permission to read shadow password file");

    if (spwd != NULL)           /* If there is a shadow password record */
        pwd-&gt;pw_passwd = spwd-&gt;sp_pwdp;     /* Use the shadow password */

    password = getpass("Password: ");

    /* Encrypt password and erase cleartext version immediately */

    encrypted = crypt(password, pwd-&gt;pw_passwd);
    for (p = password; *p != '\0'; )
        *p++ = '\0';

    if (encrypted == NULL)
        errExit("crypt");

    authOk = strcmp(encrypted, pwd-&gt;pw_passwd) == 0;
    if (!authOk) {
        printf("Incorrect password\n");
        exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
    }

    printf("Successfully authenticated: UID=%ld\n", (long) pwd-&gt;pw_uid);

    /* Now do authenticated work... */

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>users_groups/check_password.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">Example 8-2
 illustrates an important security point. Programs that read a password 
should immediately encrypt that password and erase the unencrypted 
version from memory. This minimizes the possibility of a program crash 
producing a core dump file that could be read to discover the password.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">There
 are other possible ways in which the unencrypted password could be 
exposed. For example, the password could be read from the swap file by a
 privileged program if the virtual memory page containing the password 
is swapped out. Alternatively, a process with sufficient privilege could
 read <tt>/dev/mem</tt> (a virtual device 
that presents the physical memory of a computer as a sequential stream 
of bytes) in an attempt to discover the password.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getpass()</span>
 function appeared in SUSv2, which marked it LEGACY, noting that the 
name was misleading and the function provided functionality that was in 
any case easy to implement. The specification of <span class="docEmphasis">getpass()</span> was removed in SUSv3. It nevertheless appears on most UNIX implementations.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
