<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>9.2. Effective User ID and Effective Group ID</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">9.2. Effective User ID and Effective Group ID</h3><p class="docText">On most UNIX implementations (Linux is a little different, as explained in Section 9.5),
 the effective user ID and group ID, in conjunction with the 
supplementary group IDs, are used to determine the permissions granted 
to a process when it tries to perform various operations (i.e., system 
calls). For example, these identifiers determine the permissions granted
 to a process when it accesses resources such as files and System V 
interprocess communication (IPC) objects, which themselves have 
associated user and group IDs determining to whom they belong. As we’ll 
see in Section 20.5, the effective user ID is also used by the kernel to determine whether one process can send a signal to another.</p><p class="docText">A process whose effective user ID is 0 (the user ID of <span class="docEmphasis">root</span>) has all of the privileges of the superuser. Such a process is referred to as a <span class="docEmphasis">privileged process</span>. Certain system calls can be executed only by privileged processes.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In Chapter 39,
 we describe Linux’s implementation of capabilities, a scheme that 
divides the privileges granted to the superuser into a number of 
distinct units that can be independently enabled and disabled.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Normally,
 the effective user and group IDs have the same values as the 
corresponding real IDs, but there are two ways in which the effective 
IDs can assume different values. One way is through the use of system 
calls that we discuss in Section 9.7. The second way is through the 
execution of set-user-ID and set-group-ID programs.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
