<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>9.3. Set-User-ID and Set-Group-ID Programs</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">9.3. Set-User-ID and Set-Group-ID Programs</h3><p class="docText">A
 set-user-ID program allows a process to gain privileges it would not 
normally have, by setting the process’s effective user ID to the same 
value as the user ID (owner) of the executable file. A set-group-ID 
program performs the analogous task for the process’s effective group 
ID. (The terms <span class="docEmphasis">set-user-ID program</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">set-group-ID</span> program are sometimes abbreviated as <span class="docEmphasis">set-UID program</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">set-GID program</span>.)</p><p class="docText">Like
 any other file, an executable program file has an associated user ID 
and group ID that define the ownership of the file. In addition, an 
executable file has two special permission bits: the set-user-ID and 
set-group-ID bits. (In fact, every file has these two permission bits, 
but it is their use with executable files that interests us here.) These
 permission bits are set using the <span class="docEmphasis">chmod</span> command. An unprivileged user can set these bits for files that they own. A privileged user (<tt>CAP_FOWNER</tt>) can set these bits for any file. Here’s an example:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>su </b>

Password:
# <b>ls -l prog </b>

-rwxr-xr-x    1 root     root       302585 Jun 26 15:05 prog
# <b>chmod u+s prog </b>                        <i> Turn on set-user-ID permission bit</i>

# <b>chmod g+s prog </b>
                        <i> Turn on set-group-ID permission bit</i>

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">As shown in this example, it is possible for a program to have both of these bits set, although this is uncommon. When <span class="docEmphasis">ls -l</span> is used to list the permissions for a program that has the set-user-ID or set-group-ID permission bit set, then the <span class="docEmphasis">x</span> that is normally used to indicate that execute permission is set is replaced by an <span class="docEmphasis">s</span>:</p><pre># <b>ls -l prog</b>

-rwsr-sr-x    1 root     root       302585 Jun 26 15:05 prog</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">When a set-user-ID program is run (i.e., loaded into a process’s memory by an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>),
 the kernel sets the effective user ID of the process to be the same as 
the user ID of the executable file. Running a set-group-ID program has 
an analogous effect for the effective group ID of the process. Changing 
the effective user or group ID in this way gives a process (in other 
words, the user executing the program) privileges it would not normally 
have. For example, if an executable file is owned by <span class="docEmphasis">root</span>
 (superuser) and has the set-user-ID permission bit enabled, then the 
process gains superuser privileges when that program is run.</p><p class="docText">Set-user-ID and set-group-ID programs can also be designed to change the effective IDs of a process to something other than <span class="docEmphasis">root</span>.
 For example, to provide access to a protected file (or other system 
resource), it may suffice to create a special-purpose user (group) ID 
that has the privileges required to access the file, and create a 
set-user-ID (set-group-ID) program that changes the effective user 
(group) ID of a process to that ID. This permits the program to access 
the file without allowing it all of the privileges of the superuser.</p><p class="docText">Sometimes, we’ll use the term set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span> to distinguish a set-user-ID program that is owned by <span class="docEmphasis">root</span> from one owned by another user, which merely gives a process the privileges accorded to that user.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">We have now started using the term <span class="docEmphasis">privileged</span>
 in two different senses. One is the sense defined earlier: a process 
with an effective user ID of 0, which has all of the privileges accorded
 to <span class="docEmphasis">root</span>. However, when we are talking about a set-user-ID program owned by a user other than <span class="docEmphasis">root</span>,
 we’ll sometimes refer to a process as gaining the privileges accorded 
to the user ID of the set-user-ID program. Which sense of the term <span class="docEmphasis">privileged</span> we mean in each case should be clear from the context.</p><p class="docText">For reasons that we explain in Section 38.3, the set-user-ID and set-group-ID permission bits don’t have any effect for shell scripts on Linux.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Examples of commonly used set-user-ID programs on Linux include: <span class="docEmphasis">passwd(1)</span>, which changes a user’s password; <span class="docEmphasis">mount(8)</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">umount(8)</span>, which mount and unmount file systems; and <span class="docEmphasis">su(1)</span>, which allows a user to run a shell under a different user ID. An example of a set-group-ID program is <span class="docEmphasis">wall(1)</span>, which writes a message to all terminals owned by the <span class="docEmphasis">tty</span> group (normally, every terminal is owned by this group).</p><p class="docText">In Section 8.5, we noted that the program in Example 8-2 needed to be run from a <span class="docEmphasis">root</span> login so that it could access the <tt>/etc/shadow</tt> file. We could make this program runnable by any user by making it a set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span> program, as follows:</p><pre>$ <b>su </b>

Password:
# <b>chown root check_password </b>             <i> Make this program owned by root</i>

# <b>chmod u+s check_password </b>              <i> With the set-user-ID bit enabled</i>
# <b>ls -l check_password </b>

-rwsr-xr-x    1 root   users    18150 Oct 28 10:49 check_password
# <b>exit </b>

$ <b>whoami </b>                                <i> This is an unprivileged login</i>

mtk
$ <b>./check_password </b>                      <i> But we can now access the shadow</i>

Username: <b>avr </b>                           <i> password file using this program</i>

Password:
Successfully authenticated: UID=1001</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The set-user-ID/set-group-ID 
technique is a useful and powerful tool, but one that can result in 
security breaches in applications that are poorly designed. In Chapter 38, we list a set of good practices that should be observed when writing set-user-ID and set-group-ID programs.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
