<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>9.4. Saved Set-User-ID and Saved Set-Group-ID</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">9.4. Saved Set-User-ID and Saved Set-Group-ID</h3><p class="docText">The
 saved set-user-ID and saved set-group-ID are designed for use with 
set-user-ID and set-group-ID programs. When a program is executed, the 
following steps (among many others) occur:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If
 the set-user-ID (set-group-ID) permission bit is enabled on the 
executable, then the effective user (group) ID of the process is made 
the same as the owner of the executable. If the set-user-ID 
(set-group-ID) bit is not set, then no change is made to the effective 
user (group) ID of the process.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The
 values for the saved set-user-ID and saved set-group-ID are copied from
 the corresponding effective IDs. This copying occurs regardless of 
whether the set-user-ID or set-group-ID bit is set on the file being 
executed.</p></div></li></ol></div><p class="docText">As
 an example of the effect of the above steps, suppose that a process 
whose real user ID, effective user ID, and saved set-user-ID are all 
1000 execs a set-user-ID program owned by <span class="docEmphasis">root</span> (user ID 0). After the exec, the user IDs of the process will be changed as follows:</p><pre>real=1000 effective=0 saved=0</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Various system calls allow a
 set-user-ID program to switch its effective user ID between the values 
of the real user ID and the saved set-user-ID. Analogous system calls 
allow a set-group-ID program to modify its effective group ID. In this 
manner, the program can temporarily drop and regain whatever privileges 
are associated with the user (group) ID of the execed file. (In other 
words, the program can move between the states of potentially being 
privileged and actually operating with privilege.) As we’ll elaborate in
 Section 38.2,
 it is secure programming practice for set-user-ID and set-group-ID 
programs to operate under the unprivileged (i.e., real) ID whenever the 
program doesn’t actually need to perform any operations associated with 
the privileged (i.e., saved set) ID.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The saved set-user-ID and saved set-group-ID are sometimes synonymously referred to as the <span class="docEmphasis">saved user ID</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">saved group ID</span>.</p><p class="docText">The
 saved set IDs are a System V invention adopted by POSIX. They were not 
provided on releases of BSD prior to 4.4. The initial POSIX.1 standard 
made support for these IDs optional, but later standards (starting with 
FIPS 151-1 in 1988) made support mandatory.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
