<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>9.5. File-System User ID and File-System Group ID</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">9.5. File-System User ID and File-System Group ID</h3><p class="docText">On
 Linux, it is the file-system user and group IDs, rather than the 
effective user and group IDs, that are used (in conjunction with the 
supplementary group IDs) to determine permissions when performing 
file-system operations such as opening files, changing file ownership, 
and modifying file permissions. (The effective IDs are still used, as on
 other UNIX implementations, for the other purposes described earlier.)</p><p class="docText">Normally,
 the file-system user and group IDs have the same values as the 
corresponding effective IDs (and thus typically are the same as the 
corresponding real IDs). Furthermore, whenever the effective user or 
group ID is changed, either by a system call or by execution of a 
set-user-ID or set-group-ID program, the corresponding file-system ID is
 also changed to the same value. Since the file-system IDs follow the 
effective IDs in this way, this means that Linux effectively behaves 
just like any other UNIX implementation when privileges and permissions 
are being checked. The file-system IDs differ from the corresponding 
effective IDs, and hence Linux differs from other UNIX implementations, 
only when we use two Linux-specific system calls, <span class="docEmphasis">setfsuid()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">setfsgid()</span>, to explicitly make them different.</p><p class="docText">Why
 does Linux provide the file-system IDs and in what circumstances would 
we want the effective and file-system IDs to differ? The reasons are 
primarily historical. The file-system IDs first appeared in Linux 1.2. 
In that kernel version, one process could send a signal to another if 
the effective user ID of the sender matched the real or effective user 
ID of the target process. This affected certain programs such as the 
Linux NFS (Network File System) server program, which needed to be able 
to access files as though it had the effective IDs of the corresponding 
client process. However, if the NFS server changed its effective user 
ID, it would be vulnerable to signals from unprivileged user processes. 
To prevent this possibility, the separate file-system user and group IDs
 were devised. By leaving its effective IDs unchanged, but changing its 
file-system IDs, the NFS server could masquerade as another user for the
 purpose of accessing files without being vulnerable to signals from 
user processes.</p><p class="docText">From 
kernel 2.0 onward, Linux adopted the SUSv3-mandated rules regarding 
permission for sending signals, and these rules don’t involve the 
effective user ID of the target process (refer to Section 20.5).
 Thus, the file-system ID feature is no longer strictly necessary (a 
process can nowadays achieve the desired results by making judicious use
 of the system calls described later in this chapter to change the value
 of the effective user ID to and from an unprivileged value, as 
required), but it remains for compatibility with existing software.</p><p class="docText">Since
 the file-system IDs are something of an oddity, and they normally have 
the same values as the corresponding effective IDs, in the remainder of 
this book, we’ll generally describe various file permission checks, as 
well as the setting of the ownership of new files, in terms of the 
effective IDs of a process. Even though the process’s file-system IDs 
are really used for these purposes on Linux, in practice, their presence
 seldom makes an effective difference.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
