<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>9.8. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">9.8. Summary</h3><p class="docText">Each
 process has a number of associated user and group IDs (credentials). 
The real IDs define the ownership of the process. On most UNIX 
implementations, the effective IDs are used to determine a process’s 
permissions when accessing resources such as files. On Linux, however, 
the file-system IDs are used for determining permissions for accessing 
files, while the effective IDs are used for other permission checks. 
(Because the file-system IDs normally have the same values as the 
corresponding effective IDs, Linux behaves in the same way as other UNIX
 implementations when checking file permissions.) A process’s 
supplementary group IDs are a further set of groups of which the process
 is considered to be a member for the purpose of permission checking. 
Various system calls and library functions allow a process to retrieve 
and change its user and group IDs.</p><p class="docText">When
 a set-user-ID program is run, the effective user ID of the process is 
set to that of the owner of the file. This mechanism allows a user to 
assume the identity, and thus the privileges, of another user while 
running a particular program. Correspondingly, set-group-ID programs 
change the effective group ID of the process running a program. The 
saved set-user-ID and saved set-group-ID allow set-user-ID and 
set-group-ID programs to temporarily drop and then later reassume 
privileges.</p><p class="docText">The user ID 0 is special. Normally, a single user account, named <span class="docEmphasis">root</span>,
 has this user ID. Processes with an effective user ID of 0 are 
privileged—that is, they are exempt from many of the permission checks 
normally performed when a process makes various system calls (such as 
those used to arbitrarily change the various process user and group 
IDs).</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
