<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 10. Time</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0EGPAI">Chapter 10. Time</h2><p class="docText">Within a program, we may be interested in two kinds of time:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Real time</span>: This is the time as measured either from some standard point (<span class="docEmphasis">calendar</span> time) or from some fixed point (typically the start) in the life of a process (<span class="docEmphasis">elapsed</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">wall clock</span>
 time). Obtaining the calendar time is useful to programs that, for 
example, timestamp database records or files. Measuring elapsed time is 
useful for a program that takes periodic actions or makes regular 
measurements from some external input device.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Process time</span>:
 This is the amount of CPU time used by a process. Measuring process 
time is useful for checking or optimizing the performance of a program 
or algorithm.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Most
 computer architectures have a built-in hardware clock that enables the 
kernel to measure real and process time. In this chapter, we look at 
system calls for dealing with both sorts of time, and library functions 
for converting between human-readable and internal representations of 
time. Since human-readable representations of time are dependent on the 
geographical location and on linguistic and cultural conventions, 
discussion of these representations leads us into an investigation of 
timezones and locales.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
