<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>10.1. Calendar Time</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">10.1. Calendar Time</h3><p class="docText">Regardless
 of geographic location, UNIX systems represent time internally as a 
measure of seconds since the Epoch; that is, since midnight on the 
morning of 1 January 1970, Universal Coordinated Time (UTC, previously 
known as Greenwich Mean Time, or GMT). This is approximately the date 
when the UNIX system came into being. Calendar time is stored in 
variables of type <span class="docEmphasis">time_t</span>, an integer type specified by SUSv3.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On 32-bit Linux systems, <span class="docEmphasis">time_t</span>,
 which is a signed integer, can represent dates in the range 13 December
 1901 20:45:52 to 19 January 2038 03:14:07. (SUSv3 leaves the meaning of
 negative <span class="docEmphasis">time_t</span> values unspecified.) Thus, many current 32-bit UNIX systems face a theoretical <span class="docEmphasis">Year 2038</span>
 problem, which they may encounter before 2038, if they do calculations 
based on dates in the future. This problem will be significantly 
alleviated by the fact that by 2038, probably all UNIX systems will have
 long become 64-bit and beyond. However, 32-bit embedded systems, which 
typically have a much longer lifespan than desktop hardware, may still 
be afflicted by the problem. Furthermore, the problem will remain for 
any legacy data and applications that maintain time in a 32-bit <span class="docEmphasis">time_t</span> format.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">gettimeofday()</span> system call returns the calendar time in the buffer pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">tv</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/time.h&gt;
int <b>gettimeofday</b>(struct timeval *<span class="docEmphasis">tv</span>, struct timezone *<span class="docEmphasis">tz</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">tv</span> argument is a pointer to a structure of the following form:</p><pre>struct timeval {
    time_t      tv_sec;     /* Seconds since 00:00:00, 1 Jan 1970 UTC */
    suseconds_t tv_usec;    /* Additional microseconds (long int) */
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Although the <span class="docEmphasis">tv_usec</span>
 field affords microsecond precision, the accuracy of the value it 
returns is determined by the architecture-dependent implementation. (The
 <span class="docEmphasis">u</span> in <span class="docEmphasis">tv_usec</span>
 derives from the resemblance to the Greek letter µ (“mu”) used in the 
metric system to denote one-millionth.) On modern x86-32 systems (i.e., 
Pentium systems with a Timestamp Counter register that is incremented 
once at each CPU clock cycle), <span class="docEmphasis">gettimeofday()</span> does provide microsecond accuracy.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">tz</span> argument to <span class="docEmphasis">gettimeofday()</span>
 is a historical artifact. In older UNIX implementations, it was used to
 retrieve timezone information for the system. This argument is now 
obsolete and should always be specified as <tt>NULL</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">If the <span class="docEmphasis">tz</span> argument is supplied, then it returns a <span class="docEmphasis">timezone</span> structure whose fields contain whatever values were specified in the (obsolete) <span class="docEmphasis">tz</span> argument in a previous call to <span class="docEmphasis">settimeofday()</span>. This structure contains two fields: <span class="docEmphasis">tz_minuteswest</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">tz_dsttime</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">tz_minuteswest</span>
 field indicates the number of minutes that must be added to times in 
this zone to match UTC, with a negative value indicating that an 
adjustment of minutes to the east of UTC (e.g., for Central European 
Time, one hour ahead of UTC, this field would contain the value -60). 
The <span class="docEmphasis">tz_dsttime</span>
 field contains a constant that was designed to represent the daylight 
saving time (DST) regime in force in this timezone. It is because the 
DST regime can’t be represented using a simple algorithm that the <span class="docEmphasis">tz</span> argument is obsolete. (This field has never been supported on Linux.) See the <span class="docEmphasis">gettimeofday(2)</span> manual page for further details.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">time()</span><a name="seconds since"></a> system call returns the number of seconds since the Epoch (i.e., the same value that <span class="docEmphasis">gettimeofday()</span> returns in the <span class="docEmphasis">tv_sec</span> field of its <span class="docEmphasis">tv</span> argument).</p><pre>#include &lt;time.h&gt;

time_t <b>time</b>(time_t *<span class="docEmphasis">timep</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns number of seconds since the Epoch, or <span class="docEmphasis">(time_t)</span> -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If the <span class="docEmphasis">timep</span> argument is not <tt>NULL</tt>, the number of seconds since the Epoch is also placed in the location to which <span class="docEmphasis">timep</span> points.</p><p class="docText">Since <span class="docEmphasis">time()</span> returns the same value in two ways, and the only possible error that can occur when using <span class="docEmphasis">time()</span> is to give an invalid address in the <span class="docEmphasis">timep</span> argument (<tt>EFAULT</tt>), we often simply use the following call (without error checking):</p><pre>t = time(NULL);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The reason for the existence of two system calls (<span class="docEmphasis">time()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">gettimeofday()</span>) with essentially the same purpose is historical. Early UNIX implementations provided <span class="docEmphasis">time()</span>. 4.2BSD added the more precise <span class="docEmphasis">gettimeofday()</span> system call. The existence of <span class="docEmphasis">time()</span> as a system call is now redundant; it could be implemented as a library function that calls <span class="docEmphasis">gettimeofday()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
