<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>10.3. Timezones</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">10.3. Timezones</h3><p class="docText">Different
 countries (and sometimes even different regions within a single 
country) operate on different timezones and DST regimes. Programs that 
input and output times must take into account the timezone and DST 
regime of the system on which they are run. Fortunately, all of the 
details are handled by the C library.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EYVAI">10.3.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E3VAI">10.3.1.1. Timezone definitions</h5><p class="docText">Timezone
 information tends to be both voluminous and volatile. For this reason, 
rather than encoding it directly into programs or libraries, the system 
maintains this information in files in standard formats.</p><p class="docText">These files reside in the directory <tt>/usr/share/zoneinfo</tt>.
 Each file in this directory contains information about the timezone 
regime in a particular country or region. These files are named 
according to the timezone they describe, so we may find files with names
 such as <tt>EST</tt> (US Eastern Standard Time), <tt>CET</tt> (Central European Time), <tt>UTC</tt>, <tt>Turkey</tt>, and <tt>Iran</tt>. In addition, subdirectories can be used to hierarchically group related timezones. Under a directory such as <tt>Pacific</tt>, we may find the files <tt>Auckland</tt>, <tt>Port_Moresby</tt>, and <tt>Galapagos</tt>.
 When we specify a timezone for use by a program, in effect, we are 
specifying a relative pathname for one of the timezone files in this 
directory.</p><p class="docText">The local time for the system is defined by the timezone file <tt>/etc/localtime</tt>, which is often linked to one of the files in <tt>/usr/share/zoneinfo</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The format of timezone files is documented in the <span class="docEmphasis">tzfile(5)</span> manual page. Timezone files are built using <span class="docEmphasis">zic(8)</span>, the <span class="docEmphasis">zone information compiler</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">zdump(8)</span> command can be used to display the time as it would be currently according to the timezone in a specified timezone file.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EWXAI">10.3.1.2. Specifying the timezone for a program</h5><p class="docText">To specify a timezone when running a program, we set the <tt>TZ</tt> environment variable to a string consisting of a colon (<tt>:</tt>) followed by one of the timezone names defined in <tt>/usr/share/zoneinfo</tt>. Setting the timezone automatically influences the functions <span class="docEmphasis">ctime()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">localtime()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">mktime()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">strftime()</span>.</p><p class="docText">To obtain the current timezone setting, each of these functions uses <span class="docEmphasis">tzset(3)</span>, which initializes three global variables:</p><pre>char *tzname[2];    /* Name of timezone and alternate (DST) timezone */
int daylight;       /* Nonzero if there is an alternate (DST) timezone */
long timezone;      /* Seconds difference between UTC and local
                       standard time */</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">tzset()</span> function first checks the <tt>TZ</tt>
 environment variable. If this variable is not set, then the timezone is
 initialized to the default defined in the timezone file <tt>/etc/localtime</tt>. If the <tt>TZ</tt>
 environment variable is defined with a value that can’t be matched to a
 timezone file, or it is an empty string, then UTC is used. The <tt>TZDIR</tt>
 environment variable (a nonstandard GNU-extension) can be set to the 
name of a directory in which timezone information should be sought 
instead of in the default <tt>/usr/share/zoneinfo</tt>.</p><p class="docText">We can see the effect of the <tt>TZ</tt> variable by running the program in Example 10-4.
 In the first run, we see the output corresponding to the system’s 
default timezone (Central European Time, CET). In the second run, we 
specify the timezone for New Zealand, which at this time of year is on 
daylight saving time, 12 hours ahead of CET.</p><pre>$ <b>./show_time</b>
ctime() of time() value is:  Tue Feb  1 10:25:56 2011
asctime() of local time is:  Tue Feb  1 10:25:56 2011
strftime() of local time is: Tuesday, 01 Feb 2011, 10:25:56 CET
$ <b>TZ=":Pacific/Auckland" ./show_time</b>
ctime() of time() value is:  Tue Feb  1 22:26:19 2011
asctime() of local time is:  Tue Feb  1 22:26:19 2011
strftime() of local time is: Tuesday, 01 February 2011, 22:26:19 NZDT</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E24AI">Example 10-4. Demonstrate the effect of timezones and locales</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>time/show_time.c</b>
#include &lt;time.h&gt;
#include &lt;locale.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

#define BUF_SIZE 200

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    time_t t;
    struct tm *loc;
    char buf[BUF_SIZE];

    if (setlocale(LC_ALL, "") == NULL)
        errExit("setlocale");   /* Use locale settings in conversions */

    t = time(NULL);

    printf("ctime() of time() value is:  %s", ctime(&amp;t));

    loc = localtime(&amp;t);
    if (loc == NULL)
        errExit("localtime");

    printf("asctime() of local time is:  %s", asctime(loc));

    if (strftime(buf, BUF_SIZE, "%A, %d %B %Y, %H:%M:%S %Z", loc) == 0)
        fatal("strftime returned 0");
    printf("strftime() of local time is: %s\n", buf);

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
      <b>time/show_time.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">SUSv3 defines two general ways in which the <tt>TZ</tt> environment variable can be set. As just described, <tt>TZ</tt>
 can be set to a character sequence consisting of a colon plus a string 
that identifies the timezone in an implementation-specific manner, 
typically as a pathname for a timezone description file. (Linux and some
 other UNIX implementations permit the colon to be omitted when using 
this form, but SUSv3 doesn’t specify this; for portability, we should 
always include the colon.)</p><p class="docText">The other method of setting <tt>TZ</tt> is fully specified in SUSv3. In this method, we assign a string of the following form to <tt>TZ</tt>:</p><pre><span class="docEmphasis">std offset</span> [ <span class="docEmphasis">dst</span> [ <span class="docEmphasis">offset</span> ][ , <span class="docEmphasis">start-date</span> [
 /<span class="docEmphasis">time</span> ] , <span class="docEmphasis">end-date</span> [ /<span class="docEmphasis">time</span> ]]]</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Spaces are included in the line above for clarity, but none should appear in the <tt>TZ</tt> value. The brackets (<tt>[]</tt>) are used to indicate optional components.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">std</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">dst</span> components are strings that define names for the standard and DST timezones; for example, <span class="docEmphasis">CET</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">CEST</span> for Central European Time and Central European Summer Time. The <span class="docEmphasis">offset</span>
 in each case specifies the positive or negative adjustment to add to 
the local time to convert it to UTC. The final four components provide a
 rule describing when the change from standard time to DST occurs.</p><p class="docText">The dates can be specified in a variety of forms, one of which is <tt>M</tt><tt><i>m</i></tt><tt>.</tt><tt><i>n</i></tt><tt>.</tt>d. This notation means day <span class="docEmphasis">d</span> (0 = Sunday, 6 = Saturday) of week <span class="docEmphasis">n</span> (1 to 5, where 5 always means the last <span class="docEmphasis">d</span> day) of month <span class="docEmphasis">m</span> (1 to 12). If the <span class="docEmphasis">time</span> is omitted, it defaults to 02:00:00 (2 AM) in each case.</p><p class="docText">Here is how we could define <tt>TZ</tt>
 for Central Europe, where standard time is one hour ahead of UTC, and 
DST—running from the last Sunday in March to the last Sunday in 
October—is 2 hours ahead of UTC:</p><pre>TZ="CET-1:00:00CEST-2:00:00,M3.5.0,M10.5.0"</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We omitted the 
specification of the time for the DST changeover, since it occurs at the
 default of 02:00:00. Of course, the preceding form is less readable 
than the Linux-specific near equivalent:</p><pre>TZ=":Europe/Berlin"</pre><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
