<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>10.4. Locales</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">10.4. Locales</h3><p class="docText">Several
 thousand languages are spoken across the world, of which a significant 
percentage are regularly used on computer systems. Furthermore, 
different countries use different conventions for displaying information
 such as numbers, currency amounts, dates, and times. For example, in 
most European countries, a comma, rather than a decimal point, is used 
to separate the integer and fractional parts of (real) numbers, and most
 countries use formats for writing dates that are different from the <span class="docEmphasis">MM/DD/YY</span> format used in the United States. SUSv3 defines a <span class="docEmphasis">locale</span> as the “subset of a user’s environment that depends on language and cultural conventions.”</p><p class="docText">Ideally,
 all programs designed to run in more than one location should deal with
 locales in order to display and input information in the user’s 
preferred language and format. This constitutes the complex subject of <span class="docEmphasis">internationalization</span>.
 In the ideal world, we would write a program once, and then, wherever 
it was run, it would automatically do the right things when performing 
I/O; that is, it would perform the task of <span class="docEmphasis">localization</span>.
 Internationalizing programs is a somewhat time-consuming job, although 
various tools are available to ease the task. Program libraries such as <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> also provide facilities to help with internationalization.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The term <span class="docEmphasis">internationalization</span> is often written as <span class="docEmphasis">I18N</span>, for <span class="docEmphasis">I</span> plus 18 letters plus <span class="docEmphasis">N</span>.
 As well as being quicker to write, this term has the advantage of 
avoiding the difference in the spelling of the term itself in British 
and American English.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EZXAI">10.4.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E4XAI">10.4.1.1. Locale definitions</h5><p class="docText">Like
 timezone information, locale information tends to be both voluminous 
and volatile. For this reason, rather than requiring each program and 
library to store locale information, the system maintains this 
information in files in standard formats.</p><p class="docText">Locale information is maintained in a directory hierarchy under <tt>/usr/share/locale</tt> (or <tt>/usr/lib/locale</tt>
 in some distributions). Each subdirectory under this directory contains
 information about a particular locale. These directories are named 
using the following convention:</p><pre><span class="docEmphasis">language</span>[_<span class="docEmphasis">territory</span>[.<span class="docEmphasis">codeset</span>]][@<span class="docEmphasis">modifier</span>]</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">language</span> is a two-letter ISO language code, and the <span class="docEmphasis">territory</span> is a two-letter ISO country code. The <span class="docEmphasis">codeset</span> designates a character-encoding set. The <span class="docEmphasis">modifier</span>
 provides a means of distinguishing multiple locale directories whose 
language, territory, and codeset are the same. An example of a complete 
locale directory name is <tt>de_DE.utf-8@euro</tt>, as the locale for: German language, Germany, UTF-8 character encoding, employing the euro as the monetary unit.</p><p class="docText">As
 indicated by the brackets shown in the directory naming format, various
 parts of the name of a locale directory can be omitted. Often the name 
consists of just a language and a territory. Thus, the directory <tt>en_US</tt> is the locale directory for the (English-speaking) United States, and <tt>fr_CH</tt> is the locale directory for the French-speaking region of Switzerland.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">CH</span> stands for <span class="docEmphasis">Confoederatio Helvetica</span>,
 the Latin (and thus locally language-neutral) name for Switzerland. 
With four official national languages, Switzerland is an example of a 
locale analog of a country with multiple timezones.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">When we specify a locale to be used within a program, we are, in effect, specifying the name of one of the subdirectories under <tt>/usr/share/locale</tt>.
 If the locale specified to the program doesn’t match a locale directory
 name exactly, then the C library searches for a match by stripping 
components from the specified locale in the following order:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">codeset</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">normalized codeset</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">territory</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">modifier</p></div></li></ol></div><p class="docText">The
 normalized codeset is a version of the codeset name in which all 
nonalphanumeric characters are removed, all letters are converted to 
lowercase, and the resulting string is preprended with the characters <tt>iso</tt>. The aim of normalizing is to handle variations in the capitalization and punctuation (e.g., extra hyphens) of codeset names.</p><p class="docText">As an example of this stripping process, if the locale for a program is specified as <tt>fr_CH.utf-8</tt>, but no locale directory by that name exists, then the <tt>fr_CH</tt> locale directory will be matched if it exists. If the <tt>fr_CH</tt> directory doesn’t exist, then the <tt>fr</tt> locale directory will be used. In the unlikely event that the <tt>fr</tt> directory doesn’t exist, then the <span class="docEmphasis">setlocale()</span> function, described shortly, will report an error.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The file <tt>/usr/share/locale/locale.alias</tt> defines alternative ways of specifying locales to a program. See the <span class="docEmphasis">locale.aliases(5)</span> manual page for details.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Under each locale subdirectory is a standard set of files that specify the conventions for this locale, as shown in Table 10-2. Note the following further points concerning the information in this table:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <tt>LC_COLLATE</tt>
 file defines a set of rules describing how the characters in a 
character set are ordered (i.e., the “alphabetical” order for the 
character set). These rules determine the operation of the <span class="docEmphasis">strcoll(3)</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">strxfrm(3)</span>
 functions. Even languages using Latin-based scripts don’t follow the 
same ordering rules. For example, several European languages have 
additional letters that, in some cases, sort after the letter <span class="docEmphasis">Z</span>. Other special cases include the Spanish two-letter sequence <span class="docEmphasis">ll</span>, which sorts as a single letter after <span class="docEmphasis">l</span>, and the German umlauted characters such as <span class="docEmphasis">ä</span>, which corresponds to <span class="docEmphasis">ae</span> and sorts as those two letters.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>LC_MESSAGES</tt>
 directory is one step toward internationalizing the messages displayed 
by a program. More extensive internationalization of program messages 
can be accomplished through the use of either message catalogs (see the <span class="docEmphasis">catopen(3)</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">catgets(3)</span> manual pages) or the GNU <span class="docEmphasis">gettext</span> API (available at http://www.gnu.org/).</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Version 2.2.2 of <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> introduced a number of new, nonstandard locale categories. <tt>LC_ADDRESS</tt> defines rules for the locale-specific representation of a postal address. <tt>LC_IDENTIFICATION</tt> specifies information identifying the locale. <tt>LC_MEASUREMENT</tt> defines the measurement system for the locale (e.g., metric versus imperial). <tt>LC_NAME</tt> defines the locale-specific rules for representation of a person’s names and title. <tt>LC_PAPER</tt> defines the standard paper size for the locale (e.g., US letter versus the A4 format used in most other countries). <tt>LC_TELEPHONE</tt>
 defines the rules for locale-specific representation of domestic and 
international telephone numbers, as well as the international country 
prefix and international dial-out prefix.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 10-2. Contents of locale-specific subdirectories</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Filename</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Purpose</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>LC_CTYPE</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A file containing character classifications (see <span class="docEmphasis">isalpha(3)</span>) and rules for case conversion</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>LC_COLLATE</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A file containing the collation rules for a character set</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>LC_MONETARY</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A file containing formatting rules for monetary values (see <span class="docEmphasis">localeconv(3)</span> and <tt>&lt;locale.h&gt;</tt>)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>LC_NUMERIC</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A file containing formatting rules for numbers other than monetary values (see <span class="docEmphasis">localeconv(3)</span> and <tt>&lt;locale.h&gt;</tt>)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>LC_TIME</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A file containing formatting rules for dates and times</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>LC_MESSAGES</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A directory containing files specifying formats and values used for affirmative and negative (yes/no) responses</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">The
 actual locales that are defined on a system can vary. SUSv3 doesn’t 
make any requirements about this, except that a standard locale called <span class="docEmphasis">POSIX</span> (and synonymously, <span class="docEmphasis">C</span>,
 a name that exists for historical reasons) must be defined. This locale
 mirrors the historical behavior of UNIX systems. Thus, it is based on 
an ASCII character set, and uses English for names of days and months, 
and for yes/no responses. The monetary and numeric components of this 
locale are undefined.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">locale</span> command displays information about the current locale environment (within the shell). The command <span class="docEmphasis">locale -a</span> lists the full set of locales defined on the system.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EUFBI">10.4.1.2. Specifying the locale for a program</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">setlocale()</span> function is used to both set and query a program’s current locale.</p><pre>#include &lt;locale.h&gt;

char *<b>setlocale</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">category</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">locale</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns pointer to a (usually statically allocated) string identifying the new or current locale on success, or <tt>NULL</tt> on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">category</span>
 argument selects which part of the locale to set or query, and is 
specified as one of a set of constants whose names are the same as the 
locale categories listed in Table 10-2.
 Thus, for example, it is possible to set the locale for time displays 
to be Germany, while setting the locale for monetary displays to US 
dollars. Alternatively, and more commonly, we can use the value <tt>LC_ALL</tt> to specify that we want to set all aspects of the locale.</p><p class="docText">There are two different methods of setting the locale using <span class="docEmphasis">setlocale()</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">locale</span>
 argument may be a string specifying one of the locales defined on the 
system (i.e., the name of one of the subdirectories under <tt>/usr/lib/locale</tt>), such as <tt>de_DE</tt> or <tt>en_US</tt>. Alternatively, <span class="docEmphasis">locale</span> may be specified as an empty string, meaning that locale settings should be taken from environment variables:</p><pre>setlocale(LC_ALL, "");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We must make this call in order
 for a program to be cognizant of the locale environment variables. If 
the call is omitted, these environment variables will have no effect on 
the program.</p><p class="docText">When running a program that makes a <span class="docEmphasis">setlocale(LC_ALL, “”)</span>
 call, we can control various aspects of the locale using a set of 
environment variables whose names again correspond to the categories 
listed in Table 10-2: <tt>LC_CTYPE</tt>, <tt>LC_COLLATE</tt>, <tt>LC_MONETARY</tt>, <tt>LC_NUMERIC</tt>, <tt>LC_TIME</tt>, and <tt>LC_MESSAGES</tt>. Alternatively, we can use the <tt>LC_ALL</tt> or the <tt>LANG</tt> environment variable to specify the setting of the entire locale. If more than one of the preceding variables is set, then <tt>LC_ALL</tt> has precedence over all of the other <tt>LC_*</tt> environment variables, and <tt>LANG</tt> has lowest precedence. Thus, it is possible to use <tt>LANG</tt> to set a default locale for all categories, and then use individual <tt>LC_*</tt> variables to set aspects of the locale to something other than this default.</p><p class="docText">As its result, <span class="docEmphasis">setlocale()</span>
 returns a pointer to a (usually statically allocated) string that 
identifies the locale setting for this category. If we are interested 
only in discovering the current locale setting, without changing it, 
then we can specify the <span class="docEmphasis">locale</span> argument as <tt>NULL</tt>.</p><p class="docText">Locale settings control the operation of a wide range of GNU/Linux utilities, as well as many functions in <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>. Among these are the functions <span class="docEmphasis">strftime()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">strptime()</span> (Section 10.2.3), as shown by the results from <span class="docEmphasis">strftime()</span> when we run the program in Example 10-4 in a number of different locales:</p><pre>$ <b>LANG=de_DE ./show_time </b>                        <i> German locale</i>
ctime() of time() value is:  Tue Feb  1 12:23:39 2011
asctime() of local time is:  Tue Feb  1 12:23:39 2011
strftime() of local time is: Dienstag, 01 Februar 2011, 12:23:39 CET</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The next run demonstrates that the <tt>LC_TIME</tt> has precedence over <tt>LANG</tt>:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>LANG=de_DE LC_TIME=it_IT ./show_time </b>          <i> German and Italian locales</i>
ctime() of time() value is:  Tue Feb  1 12:24:03 2011
asctime() of local time is:  Tue Feb  1 12:24:03 2011
strftime() of local time is: martedì, 01 febbraio 2011, 12:24:03 CET

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">And this run demonstrates that <tt>LC_ALL</tt> has precedence over <tt>LC_TIME</tt>:</p><pre>$ <b>LC_ALL=fr_FR LC_TIME=en_US ./show_time </b>        <i> French and US locales</i>
ctime() of time() value is:  Tue Feb  1 12:25:38 2011
asctime() of local time is:  Tue Feb  1 12:25:38 2011
strftime() of local time is: mardi, 01 février 2011, 12:25:38 CET</pre><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
