<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>10.5. Updating the System Clock</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">10.5. Updating the System Clock</h3><p class="docText">We now look at two interfaces that update the system clock: <span class="docEmphasis">settimeofday()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">adjtime()</span>. These interfaces are rarely used by application programs (since the system time is usually maintained by tools such as the <span class="docEmphasis">Network Time Protocol</span> daemon), and they require that the caller be privileged (<tt>CAP_SYS_TIME</tt>).</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">settimeofday()</span> system call performs the converse of <span class="docEmphasis">gettimeofday()</span> (which we described in Section 10.1): it sets the system’s calendar time to the number of seconds and microseconds specified in the <span class="docEmphasis">timeval</span> structure pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">tv</span>.</p><pre>#define _BSD_SOURCE

#include &lt;sys/time.h&gt;

int <b>settimeofday</b>(const struct timeval *<span class="docEmphasis">tv</span>, const struct timezone *<span class="docEmphasis">tz</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">As with <span class="docEmphasis">gettimeofday()</span>, the use of the <span class="docEmphasis">tz</span> argument is obsolete, and this argument should always be specified as <tt>NULL</tt>.</p><p class="docText">The microsecond precision of the <span class="docEmphasis">tv.tv_usec</span>
 field doesn’t mean that we have microsecond accuracy in controlling the
 system clock, since the clock’s granularity may be larger than one 
microsecond.</p><p class="docText">Although <span class="docEmphasis">settimeofday()</span> is not specified in SUSv3, it is widely available on other UNIX implementations.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Linux also provides the <span class="docEmphasis">stime()</span> system call for setting the system clock. The difference between <span class="docEmphasis">settimeofday()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">stime()</span> is that the latter call allows the new calendar time to be expressed with a precision of only 1 second. As with <span class="docEmphasis">time()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">gettimeofday()</span>, the reason for the existence of both <span class="docEmphasis">stime()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">settimeofday()</span> is historical: the latter, more precise call was added by 4.2BSD.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Abrupt changes in the system time of the sort caused by calls to <span class="docEmphasis">settimeofday()</span> can have deleterious effects on applications (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">make(1)</span>,
 a database system using timestamps, or time-stamped log files) that 
depend on a monotonically increasing system clock. For this reason, when
 making small changes to the time (of the order of a few seconds), it is
 usually preferable to use the <span class="docEmphasis">adjtime()</span> library function, which causes the system clock to gradually adjust to the desired value.</p><pre>#define _BSD_SOURCE

#include &lt;sys/time.h&gt;

int <b>adjtime</b>(struct timeval *<span class="docEmphasis">delta</span>, struct timeval *<span class="docEmphasis">olddelta</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">delta</span> argument points to a <span class="docEmphasis">timeval</span>
 structure that specifies the number of seconds and microseconds by 
which to change the time. If this value is positive, then a small amount
 of additional time is added to the system clock each second, until the 
desired amount of time has been added. If the <span class="docEmphasis">delta</span> value is negative, the clock is slowed down in a similar fashion.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The rate of clock adjustment on Linux/x86-32 amounts to 1 second per 2000 seconds (or 43.2 seconds per day).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">It may be that an incomplete clock adjustment was in progress at the time of the <span class="docEmphasis">adjtime()</span> call. In this case, the amount of remaining, unadjusted time is returned in the <span class="docEmphasis">timeval</span> structure pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">olddelta</span>. If we are not interested in this value, we can specify <span class="docEmphasis">olddelta</span> as <tt>NULL</tt>.
 Conversely, if we are interested only in knowing the currently 
outstanding time correction to be made, and don’t want to change the 
value, we can specify the <span class="docEmphasis">delta</span> argument as <tt>NULL</tt>.</p><p class="docText">Although not specified in SUSv3, <span class="docEmphasis">adjtime()</span> is available on most UNIX implementations.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On Linux, <span class="docEmphasis">adjtime()</span> is implemented on top of a more general (and complex) Linux-specific system call, <span class="docEmphasis">adjtimex()</span>. This system call is employed by the <span class="docEmphasis">Network Time Protocol</span> (NTP) daemon. For further information, refer to the Linux source code, the Linux <span class="docEmphasis">adjtimex(2)</span> manual page, and the NTP specification ([Mills, 1992]).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
