<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>10.6. The Software Clock (Jiffies)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">10.6. The Software Clock (Jiffies)</h3><p class="docText">The accuracy of various time-related system calls described in this book is limited to the resolution of the system <span class="docEmphasis">software clock</span>, which measures time in units called <span class="docEmphasis">jiffies</span>. The size of a jiffy is defined by the constant <tt>HZ</tt>
 within the kernel source code. This is the unit in which the kernel 
allocates the CPU to processes under the round-robin time-sharing 
scheduling algorithm (Section 35.1).</p><p class="docText">On
 Linux/x86-32 in kernel versions up to and including 2.4, the rate of 
the software clock was 100 hertz; that is, a jiffy is 10 milliseconds.</p><p class="docText">Because
 CPU speeds have greatly increased since Linux was first implemented, in
 kernel 2.6.0, the rate of the software clock was raised to 1000 hertz 
on Linux/x86-32. The advantages of a higher software clock rate are that
 timers can operate with greater accuracy and time measurements can be 
made with greater precision. However, it isn’t desirable to set the 
clock rate to arbitrarily high values, because each clock interrupt 
consumes a small amount of CPU time, which is time that the CPU can’t 
spend executing processes.</p><p class="docText">Debate among kernel developers eventually resulted in the software clock rate becoming a configurable kernel option (under <span class="docEmphasis">Processor type and features, Timer frequency</span>).
 Since kernel 2.6.13, the clock rate can be set to 100, 250 (the 
default), or 1000 hertz, giving jiffy values of 10, 4, and 1 
milliseconds, respectively. Since kernel 2.6.20, a further frequency is 
available: 300 hertz, a number that divides evenly for two common video 
frame rates: 25 frames per second (PAL) and 30 frames per second (NTSC).</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
