<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>10.7. Process Time</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">10.7. Process Time</h3><p class="docText">Process
 time is the amount of CPU time used by a process since it was created. 
For recording purposes, the kernel separates CPU time into the following
 two components:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">User CPU time</span> is the amount of time spent executing in user mode. Sometimes referred to as <span class="docEmphasis">virtual time</span>, this is the time that it appears to the program that it has access to the CPU.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">System CPU time</span>
 is amount of time spent executing in kernel mode. This is the time that
 the kernel spends executing system calls or performing other tasks on 
behalf of the program (e.g., servicing page faults).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Sometimes, we refer to process time as the <span class="docEmphasis">total CPU time</span> consumed by the process.</p><p class="docText">When we run a program from the shell, we can use the <span class="docEmphasis">time(1)</span> command to obtain both process time values, as well as the real time required to run the program:</p><pre>$ <b>time ./myprog</b>
real    0m4.84s
user    0m1.030s
sys     0m3.43s</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">times()</span> system call retrieves process time information, returning it in the structure pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">buf</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/times.h&gt;

clock_t <b>times</b>(struct tms *<span class="docEmphasis">buf</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns number of clock ticks (<span class="docEmphasis">sysconf(_SC_CLK_TCK)</span>) since “arbitrary” time in past on success, or <span class="docEmphasis">(clock_t)</span> -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">This <span class="docEmphasis">tms</span> structure pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">buf</span> has the following form:</p><pre>struct tms {
    clock_t tms_utime;   /* User CPU time used by caller */
    clock_t tms_stime;   /* System CPU time used by caller */
    clock_t tms_cutime;  /* User CPU time of all (waited for) children */
    clock_t tms_cstime;  /* System CPU time of all (waited for) children */
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The first two fields of the <span class="docEmphasis">tms</span>
 structure return the user and system components of CPU time used so far
 by the calling process. The last two fields return information about 
the CPU time used by all child processes that have terminated and for 
which the parent (i.e., the caller of <span class="docEmphasis">times()</span>) has done a <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span> system call.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">clock_t</span> data type used to type the four fields of the <span class="docEmphasis">tms</span> structure is an integer type that measures time in units called <span class="docEmphasis">clock ticks</span>. We can call <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf(_SC_CLK_TCK)</span> to obtain the number of clock ticks per second, and then divide a <span class="docEmphasis">clock_t</span> value by this number to convert to seconds. (We describe <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span> in Section 11.2.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On most Linux hardware architectures, <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf(_SC_CLK_TCK)</span> returns the number 100. This corresponds to the kernel constant <tt>USER_HZ</tt>. However, <tt>USER_HZ</tt> can be defined with a value other than 100 on a few architectures, such as Alpha and IA-64.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">On success, <span class="docEmphasis">times()</span>
 returns the elapsed (real) time in clock ticks since some arbitrary 
point in the past. SUSv3 deliberately does not specify what this point 
is, merely stating that it will be constant during the life of the 
calling process. Therefore, the only portable use of this return value 
is to measure elapsed time in the execution of the process by 
calculating the difference in the value returned by pairs of <span class="docEmphasis">times()</span> calls. However, even for this use, the return value of <span class="docEmphasis">times()</span> is unreliable, since it can overflow the range of <span class="docEmphasis">clock_t</span>, at which point the value would cycle to start again at 0 (i.e., a later <span class="docEmphasis">times()</span> call could return a number that is lower than an earlier <span class="docEmphasis">times()</span> call). The reliable way to measure the passage of elapsed time is to use <span class="docEmphasis">gettimeofday()</span> (described in Section 10.1).</p><p class="docText">On Linux, we can specify <span class="docEmphasis">buf</span> as <tt>NULL</tt>; in this case, <span class="docEmphasis">times()</span> simply returns a function result. However, this is not portable. The use of <tt>NULL</tt> for <span class="docEmphasis">buf</span> is not specified in SUSv3, and many other UNIX implementations require a non-<tt>NULL</tt> value for this argument.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">clock()</span>
 function provides a simpler interface for retrieving the process time. 
It returns a single value that measures the total (i.e., user plus 
system) CPU time used by the calling process.</p><pre>#include &lt;time.h&gt;

clock_t <b>clock</b>(void);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns total CPU time used by calling process measured in <tt>CLOCKS_PER_SEC</tt>, or <span class="docEmphasis">(clock_t)</span> -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The value returned by <span class="docEmphasis">clock()</span> is measured in units of <tt>CLOCKS_PER_SEC</tt>, so we must divide by this value to arrive at the number of seconds of CPU time used by the process. <tt>CLOCKS_PER_SEC</tt> is fixed at 1 million by POSIX.1, regardless of the resolution of the underlying software clock (Section 10.6). The accuracy of <span class="docEmphasis">clock()</span> is nevertheless limited to the resolution of the software clock.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Although the <span class="docEmphasis">clock_t</span> return type of <span class="docEmphasis">clock()</span> is the same data type that is used in the <span class="docEmphasis">times()</span>
 call, the units of measurement employed by these two interfaces are 
different. This is the result of historically conflicting definitions of
 <span class="docEmphasis">clock_t</span> in POSIX.1 and the C programming language standard.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Even though <tt>CLOCKS_PER_SEC</tt>
 is fixed at 1 million, SUSv3 notes that this constant could be an 
integer variable on non-XSI-conformant systems, so that we can’t 
portably treat it as a compile-time constant (i.e., we can’t use it in <tt>#ifdef</tt> preprocessor expressions). Because it may be defined as a long integer (i.e., <tt>1000000L</tt>), we always cast this constant to <span class="docEmphasis">long</span> so that we can portably print it with <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> (see Section 3.6.2).</p><p class="docText">SUSv3 states that <span class="docEmphasis">clock()</span>
 should return “the processor time used by the process.” This is open to
 different interpretations. On some UNIX implementations, the time 
returned by <span class="docEmphasis">clock()</span> includes the CPU time used by all waited-for children. On Linux, it does not.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKDBI">10.7.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EODBI">10.7.1.1. Example program</h5><p class="docText">The program in Example 10-5 demonstrates the use of the functions described in this section. The <span class="docEmphasis">displayProcessTimes()</span> function prints the message supplied by the caller, and then uses <span class="docEmphasis">clock()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">times()</span> to retrieve and display process times. The main program makes an initial call to <span class="docEmphasis">displayProcessTimes()</span>, and then executes a loop that consumes some CPU time by repeatedly calling <span class="docEmphasis">getppid()</span>, before again calling <span class="docEmphasis">displayProcessTimes()</span> once more to see how much CPU time has been consumed within the loop. When we use this program to call <span class="docEmphasis">getppid()</span> 10 million times, this is what we see:</p><pre>$ <b>./process_time 10000000</b>
CLOCKS_PER_SEC=1000000  sysconf(_SC_CLK_TCK)=100

At program start:
        clock() returns: 0 clocks-per-sec (0.00 secs)
        times() yields: user CPU=0.00; system CPU: 0.00
After getppid() loop:
        clock() returns: 2960000 clocks-per-sec (2.96 secs)
        times() yields: user CPU=1.09; system CPU: 1.87</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EAFBI">Example 10-5. Retrieving process CPU times</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>time/process_time.c</b>
#include &lt;sys/times.h&gt;
#include &lt;time.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

static void             /* Display 'msg' and process times */
displayProcessTimes(const char *msg)
{
    struct tms t;
    clock_t clockTime;
    static long clockTicks = 0;

    if (msg != NULL)
        printf("%s", msg);
    if (clockTicks == 0) {      /* Fetch clock ticks on first call */
        clockTicks = sysconf(_SC_CLK_TCK);
        if (clockTicks == -1)
            errExit("sysconf");
    }

    clockTime = clock();
    if (clockTime == -1)
        errExit("clock");

    printf("        clock() returns: %ld clocks-per-sec (%.2f secs)\n",
            (long) clockTime, (double) clockTime / CLOCKS_PER_SEC);

    if (times(&amp;t) == -1)
        errExit("times");
    printf("        times() yields: user CPU=%.2f; system CPU: %.2f\n",
            (double) t.tms_utime / clockTicks,
            (double) t.tms_stime / clockTicks);
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int numCalls, j;

    printf("CLOCKS_PER_SEC=%ld  sysconf(_SC_CLK_TCK)=%ld\n\n",
            (long) CLOCKS_PER_SEC, sysconf(_SC_CLK_TCK));

    displayProcessTimes("At program start:\n");

    numCalls = (argc &gt; 1) ? getInt(argv[1], GN_GT_0, "num-calls") : 100000000;
    for (j = 0; j &lt; numCalls; j++)
        (void) getppid();

    displayProcessTimes("After getppid() loop:\n");

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
      <b>time/process_time.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
