<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>10.8. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">10.8. Summary</h3><p class="docText">Real
 time corresponds to the everyday definition of time. When real time is 
measured from some standard point, we refer to it as calendar time, by 
contrast with elapsed time, which is measured from some point (usually 
the start) in the life of a process.</p><p class="docText">Process time is the amount of CPU time used by a process, and is divided into user and system components.</p><p class="docText">Various
 system calls enable us to get and set the system clock value (i.e., 
calendar time, as measured in seconds since the Epoch), and a range of 
library functions allow conversions between calendar time and other time
 formats, including broken-down time and human-readable character 
strings. Describing such conversions took us into a discussion of 
locales and internationalization.</p><p class="docText">Using
 and displaying times and dates is an important part of many 
applications, and we’ll make frequent use of the functions described in 
this chapter in later parts of this book. We also say a little more 
about the measurement of time in Chapter 23.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EV3AI">10.8.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EZ3AI">10.8.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">Details of how the Linux kernel measures time can be found in [Love, 2010].</p><p class="docText">An extensive discussion of timezones and internationalization can be found in the GNU C library manual (online at http://www.gnu.org/). The SUSv3 documents also cover locales in detail.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
