<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 11. System Limits and Options</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0EW3AI">Chapter 11. System Limits and Options</h2><p class="docText">Each
 UNIX implementation sets limits on various system features and 
resources, and provides—or chooses not to provide—options defined in 
various standards. Examples include the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">How many files can a process hold open at one time?</p></li><li><p class="docList">Does the system support realtime signals?</p></li><li><p class="docList">What is the largest value that can be stored in a variable of type <span class="docEmphasis">int</span>?</p></li><li><p class="docList">How big an argument list can a program have?</p></li><li><p class="docList">What is the maximum length of a pathname?</p></li></ul><p class="docText">While
 we could hard-code assumed limits and options into an application, this
 reduces portability, since limits and options may vary:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Across UNIX implementations</span>:
 Although limits and options may be fixed on an individual 
implementation, they can vary from one UNIX implementation to another. 
The maximum value that can be stored in an <span class="docEmphasis">int</span> is an example of such a limit.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">At run time on a particular implementation</span>:
 The kernel may have been reconfigured to change a limit, for example. 
Alternatively, the application may have been compiled on one system, but
 run on another system with different limits and options.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">From one file system to another</span>:
 For example, traditional System V file systems allow a filename to be 
up to 14 bytes, while traditional BSD file systems and most native Linux
 file systems allow filenames of up to 255 bytes.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Since
 system limits and options affect what an application may do, a portable
 application needs ways of determining limit values and whether options 
are supported. The C programming language standards and SUSv3 provide 
two principal avenues for an application to obtain such information:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Some limits and options can be determined at compile time. For example, the maximum value of an <span class="docEmphasis">int</span> is determined by the hardware architecture and compiler design choices. Such limits can be recorded in header files.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Other limits and options may vary at run time. For such cases, SUSv3 defines three functions—<span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">pathconf()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">fpathconf()</span>—that an application can call to check these implementation limits and options.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">SUSv3
 specifies a range of limits that a conforming implementation may 
enforce, as well as a set of options, each of which may or may not be 
provided by a particular system. We describe a few of these limits and 
options in this chapter, and describe others at relevant points in later
 chapters.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
