<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>11.1. System Limits</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">11.1. System Limits</h3><p class="docText">For each limit that it specifies, SUSv3 requires that all implementations support a <span class="docEmphasis">minimum value</span> for the limit. In most cases, this minimum value is defined as a constant in <tt>&lt;limits.h&gt;</tt> with a name prefixed by the string <tt>_POSIX_</tt>, and (usually) containing the string <tt>_MAX</tt>; thus, the form of the name is <tt>_POSIX_XXX_MAX</tt>.</p><p class="docText">If
 an application restricts itself to the minimum values that SUSv3 
requires for each limit, then it will be portable to all implementations
 of the standard. However, doing so prevents an application from taking 
advantage of implementations that provide higher limits. For this 
reason, it is usually preferable to determine the limit on a particular 
system using <tt>&lt;limits.h&gt;</tt>, <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">pathconf()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The use of the string <tt>_MAX</tt> in the limit names defined by SUSv3 can appear confusing, given their description as <span class="docEmphasis">minimum</span>
 values. The rationale for the names becomes clear when we consider that
 each of these constants defines an upper limit on some resource or 
feature, and the standards are saying that this upper limit must have a 
certain minimum value.</p><p class="docText">In some cases, <span class="docEmphasis">maximum values</span> are provided for a limit, and these values have names containing the string <tt>_MIN</tt>.
 For these constants, the converse holds true: they represent a lower 
limit on some resource, and the standards are saying that, on a 
conforming implementation, this lower limit can be no greater than a 
certain value. For example, the <tt>FLT_MIN</tt> limit (<tt>1E-37</tt>)
 defines the largest value that an implementation may set for the 
smallest floating-point number that may be represented, and all 
conforming implementations will be able to represent floating-point 
numbers at least this small.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Each limit has a <span class="docEmphasis">name</span>, which corresponds to the <span class="docEmphasis">minimum value name</span> described above, but lacks the <tt>_POSIX_</tt> prefix. An implementation <span class="docEmphasis">may</span> define a constant with this name in <tt>&lt;limits.h&gt;</tt>
 to indicate the corresponding limit for this implementation. If 
defined, this limit will always be at least the size of the minimum 
value described above (i.e., <tt>XXX_MAX &gt;= _POSIX_XXX_MAX</tt>).</p><p class="docText">SUSv3 divides the limits that it specifies into three categories: <span class="docEmphasis">runtime invariant values</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">pathname variable values</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">runtime increasable values</span>. In the following paragraphs, we describe these categories and provide some examples.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGABI">11.1.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EKABI">11.1.1.1. Runtime invariant values (possibly indeterminate)</h5><p class="docText">A runtime invariant value is a limit whose value, if defined in <tt>&lt;limits.h&gt;</tt>,
 is fixed for the implementation. However, the value may be 
indeterminate (perhaps because it depends on available memory space), 
and hence omitted from <tt>&lt;limits.h&gt;</tt>. In this case (and even if the limit is also defined in <tt>&lt;limits.h&gt;</tt>), an application can use <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span> to determine the value at run time.</p><p class="docText">The <tt>MQ_PRIO_MAX</tt> limit is an example of a runtime invariant value. As noted in Section 52.5.1, there is a limit on the priority for messages in POSIX message queues. SUSv3 defines the constant <tt>_POSIX_MQ_PRIO_MAX</tt>,
 with the value 32, as the minimum value that all conforming 
implementations must provide for this limit. This means that we can be 
sure that all conforming implementations will allow priorities from 0 up
 to at least 31 for message priorities. A UNIX implementation can set a 
higher limit than this, defining the constant <tt>MQ_PRIO_MAX</tt> in <tt>&lt;limits.h&gt;</tt> with the value of its limit. For example, on Linux, <tt>MQ_PRIO_MAX</tt> is defined with the value 32,768. This value can also be determined at run time using the following call:</p><pre>lim = sysconf(_SC_MQ_PRIO_MAX);</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EUBBI">11.1.1.2. Pathname variable values</h5><p class="docText">Pathname
 variable values are limits that relate to pathnames (files, 
directories, terminals, and so on). Each limit may be constant for the 
implementation or may vary from one file system to another. In cases 
where a limit can vary depending on the pathname, an application can 
determine its value using <span class="docEmphasis">pathconf()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">fpathconf()</span>.</p><p class="docText">The <tt>NAME_MAX</tt>
 limit is an example of a pathname variable value. This limit defines 
the maximum size for a filename on a particular file system. SUSv3 
defines the constant <tt>_POSIX_NAME_MAX</tt>,
 with the value 14 (the old System V file-system limit), as the minimum 
value that an implementation must allow. An implementation may define <tt>NAME_MAX</tt> with a limit higher than this and/or make information about a specific file system available via a call of the following form:</p><pre>lim = pathconf(directory_path, _PC_NAME_MAX)</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">directory_path</span> is a pathname for a directory on the file system of interest.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EQCBI">11.1.1.3. Runtime increasable values</h5><p class="docText">A
 runtime increasable value is a limit that has a fixed minimum value for
 a particular implementation, and all systems running the implementation
 will provide at least this minimum value. However, a specific system 
may increase this limit at run time, and an application can find the 
actual value supported on the system using <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span>.</p><p class="docText">An example of a runtime increasable value is <tt>NGROUPS_MAX</tt>, which defines the maximum number of simultaneous supplementary group IDs for a process (Section 9.6). SUSv3 defines the corresponding minimum value, <tt>_POSIX_NGROUPS_MAX</tt>, with the value 8. At run time, an application can retrieve the limit using the call <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf(_SC_NGROUPS_MAX)</span>.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EHDBI">11.1.1.4. Summary of selected SUSv3 limits</h5><p class="docText">Table 11-1 lists a few of the SUSv3-defined limits that are relevant to this book (other limits are introduced in later chapters).</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 11-1. Selected SUSv3 limits</h5></caption><colgroup span="4"><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Name of limit (<tt>&lt;limits.h&gt;</tt>)</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Min. value</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom"><span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()/pathconf()</span> name (<tt>&lt;unistd.h&gt;</tt></th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ARG_MAX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>4096</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_SC_ARG_MAX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Maximum bytes for arguments (<span class="docEmphasis">argv</span>) plus environment (<span class="docEmphasis">environ</span>) that can be supplied to an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> (Section 6.7 and Section 27.2.3)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">none</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">none</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_SC_CLK_TCK</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Unit of measurement for <span class="docEmphasis">times()</span></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>LOGIN_NAME_MAX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>9</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_SC_LOGIN_NAME_MAX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Maximum size of a login name (including terminating null byte)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>OPEN_MAX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>20</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_SC_OPEN_MAX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Maximum
 number of file descriptors that a process can have open at one time, 
and one greater than maximum usable descriptor number (Section 36.2)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>NGROUPS_MAX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>8</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_SC_NGROUPS_MAX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Maximum number of supplementary groups of which a process can be a member (Section 9.7.3)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">none</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>1</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_SC_PAGESIZE</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Size of a virtual memory page (<tt>_SC_PAGE_SIZE</tt> is a synonym)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>RTSIG_MAX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>8</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_SC_RTSIG_MAX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Maximum number of distinct realtime signals (Section 22.8)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGQUEUE_MAX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>32</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_SC_SIGQUEUE_MAX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Maximum number of queued realtime signals (Section 22.8)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>STREAM_MAX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>8</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_SC_STREAM_MAX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Maximum number of <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> streams that can be open at one time</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>NAME_MAX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>14</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_PC_NAME_MAX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Maximum number of bytes in a filename, <span class="docEmphasis">excluding</span> terminating null byte</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>PATH_MAX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>256</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_PC_PATH_MAX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Maximum number of bytes in a pathname, <span class="docEmphasis">including</span> terminating null byte</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>PIPE_BUF</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>512</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_PC_PIPE_BUF</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Maximum number of bytes that can be written atomically to a pipe or FIFO (Section 44.1)</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">The first column of Table 11-1 gives the name of the limit, which may be defined as a constant in <tt>&lt;limits.h&gt;</tt><a name="second column"></a>
 to indicate the limit for a particular implementation. The second 
column is the SUSv3-defined minimum for the limit (also defined in <tt>&lt;limits.h&gt;</tt>). In most cases, each of the minimum values is defined as a constant prefixed with the string <tt>_POSIX_</tt>. For example, the constant <tt>_POSIX_RTSIG_MAX</tt> (defined with the value 8) specifies the SUSv3-required minimum corresponding to the <tt>RTSIG_MAX</tt> implementation constant. The third column specifies the constant name that can be given at run time to <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">pathconf()</span> in order to retrieve the implementation limit. The constants beginning with <tt>_SC_</tt> are for use with <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span>; those beginning with <tt>_PC_</tt> are for use with <span class="docEmphasis">pathconf()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fpathconf()</span>.</p><p class="docText">Note the following information supplementary to that shown in Table 11-1:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">getdtablesize()</span> function is an obsolete alternative for determining the process file descriptor limit (<tt>OPEN_MAX</tt>). This function was specified in SUSv2 (marked LEGACY), but was removed in SUSv3.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">getpagesize()</span> function is an obsolete alternative for determining the system page size (<tt>_SC_PAGESIZE</tt>). This function was specified in SUSv2 (marked LEGACY), but was removed in SUSv3.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The constant <tt>FOPEN_MAX</tt>, defined in <tt>&lt;stdio.h&gt;</tt>, is synonymous with <tt>STREAM_MAX</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>NAME_MAX</tt> excludes the terminating null byte, while <tt>PATH_MAX</tt> includes it. This inconsistency repairs an earlier inconsistency in the POSIX.1 standard that left it unclear whether <tt>PATH_MAX</tt> included the terminating null byte. Defining <tt>PATH_MAX</tt> to include the terminator means that applications that allocated just <tt>PATH_MAX</tt> bytes for a pathname will still conform to the standard.</p></li></ul><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EUYBI">11.1.1.5. Determining limits and options from the shell: <span class="docEmphasis">getconf</span></h5><p class="docText">From the shell, we can use the <span class="docEmphasis">getconf</span>
 command to obtain the limits and options implemented by a particular 
UNIX implementation. The general form of this command is as follows:</p><pre>$ <b>getconf</b> <b><tt><i>variable-name</i></tt></b> [ <b><tt><i>pathname</i></tt></b> ]</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">variable-name</span> identifies the limit of interest and is one of the SUSV3 standard limit names, such as <tt>ARG_MAX</tt> or <tt>NAME_MAX</tt>.
 Where the limit relates to a pathname, we must specify a pathname as 
the second argument to the command, as in the second of the following 
examples.</p><pre>$ <b>getconf ARG_MAX</b>
131072
$ <b>getconf NAME_MAX /boot</b>
255</pre><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
