<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>11.2. Retrieving System Limits (and Options) at Run Time</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">11.2. Retrieving System Limits (and Options) at Run Time</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span> function allows an application to obtain the values of system limits at run time.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

long <b>sysconf</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">name</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns value of limit specified by <span class="docEmphasis">name</span>, or -1 if limit is indeterminate or an error occurred</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">name</span> argument is one of the <tt>_SC_*</tt> constants defined in <tt>&lt;unistd.h&gt;</tt>, some of which are listed in Table 11-1. The value of the limit is returned as the function result.</p><p class="docText">If a limit can’t be determined, <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span> returns -1. It may also return -1 if an error occurred. (The only specified error is <tt>EINVAL</tt>, indicating that <span class="docEmphasis">name</span> is not valid.) To distinguish the case of an indeterminate limit from an error, we must set <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> to 0 before the call; if the call returns -1 and <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> is set after the call, then an error occurred.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The limit values returned by <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span> (as well as <span class="docEmphasis">pathconf()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fpathconf()</span>) are always (<span class="docEmphasis">long</span>) integers. In the rationale text for <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span>,
 SUSv3 notes that strings were considered as possible return values, but
 were rejected because of the complexity of implementation and use.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Example 11-1 demonstrates the use of <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span> to display various system limits. Running this program on one Linux 2.6.31/x86-32 system yields the following:</p><pre>$ <b>./t_sysconf</b>
_SC_ARG_MAX:         2097152
_SC_LOGIN_NAME_MAX:  256
_SC_OPEN_MAX:        1024
_SC_NGROUPS_MAX:     65536
_SC_PAGESIZE:        4096
_SC_RTSIG_MAX:       32</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EDCBI">Example 11-1. Using <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>syslim/t_sysconf.c</b>
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

static void             /* Print 'msg' plus sysconf() value for 'name' */
sysconfPrint(const char *msg, int name)
{
    long lim;

    errno = 0;
    lim = sysconf(name);
    if (lim != -1) {        /* Call succeeded, limit determinate */
        printf("%s %ld\n", msg, lim);
    } else {
        if (errno == 0)     /* Call succeeded, limit indeterminate */
            printf("%s (indeterminate)\n", msg);
        else                /* Call failed */
            errExit("sysconf %s", msg);
    }
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    sysconfPrint("_SC_ARG_MAX:        ", _SC_ARG_MAX);
    sysconfPrint("_SC_LOGIN_NAME_MAX: ", _SC_LOGIN_NAME_MAX);
    sysconfPrint("_SC_OPEN_MAX:       ", _SC_OPEN_MAX);
    sysconfPrint("_SC_NGROUPS_MAX:    ", _SC_NGROUPS_MAX);
    sysconfPrint("_SC_PAGESIZE:       ", _SC_PAGESIZE);
    sysconfPrint("_SC_RTSIG_MAX:      ", _SC_RTSIG_MAX);
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
      <b>syslim/t_sysconf.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">SUSv3 requires that the value returned by <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span>
 for a particular limit be constant for the lifetime of the calling 
process. For example, we can assume that the value returned for <tt>_SC_PAGESIZE</tt> won’t change while a process is running.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On
 Linux, there are some (sensible) exceptions to the statement that limit
 values are constant for the life of a process. A process can use <span class="docEmphasis">setrlimit()</span> (Section 36.2) to change various process resource limits that affect limit values reported by <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span>: <tt>RLIMIT_NOFILE</tt>, which determines the number of files the process may open (<tt>_SC_OPEN_MAX</tt>); <tt>RLIMIT_NPROC</tt>
 (a resource limit not actually specified in SUSv3), which is the 
per-user limit on the number of processes that may created by this 
process (<tt>_SC_CHILD_MAX</tt>); and <tt>RLIMIT_STACK</tt>,
 which, since Linux 2.6.23, determines the limit on the space allowed 
for the process’s command-line arguments and environment (<tt>_SC_ARG_MAX</tt>; see the <span class="docEmphasis">execve(2)</span> manual page for details).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
