<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>11.3. Retrieving File-Related Limits (and Options) at Run Time</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">11.3. Retrieving File-Related Limits (and Options) at Run Time</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pathconf()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fpathconf()</span> functions allow an application to obtain the values of file-related limits at run time.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

long <b>pathconf</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">name</span>);
long <b>fpathconf</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">name</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Both return value of limit specified by <span class="docEmphasis">name</span>, or -1 if limit is indeterminate or an error occurred</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The only difference between <span class="docEmphasis">pathconf()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fpathconf()</span> is the manner in which a file or directory is specified. For <span class="docEmphasis">pathconf()</span>, specification is by pathname; for <span class="docEmphasis">fpathconf()</span>, specification is via a (previously opened) file descriptor.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">name</span> argument is one of the <tt>_PC_*</tt> constants defined in <tt>&lt;unistd.h&gt;</tt>, some of which are listed in Table 11-1. Table 11-2 provides some further details about the <tt>_PC_*</tt> constants that were shown in Table 11-1.</p><p class="docText">The
 value of the limit is returned as the function result. We can 
distinguish between an indeterminate return and an error return in the 
same manner as for <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span>.</p><p class="docText">Unlike <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span>, SUSv3 doesn’t require that the values returned by <span class="docEmphasis">pathconf()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fpathconf()</span>
 remain constant over the lifetime of a process, since, for example, a 
file system may be dismounted and remounted with different 
characteristics while a process is running.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 11-2. Details of selected <span class="docEmphasis">pathconf()</span> <tt>_PC_*</tt> names</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Constant</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Notes</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_PC_NAME_MAX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">For a directory, this yields a value for files in the directory. Behavior for other file types is unspecified.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_PC_PATH_MAX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">For
 a directory, this yields the maximum length for a relative pathname 
from this directory. Behavior for other file types is unspecified.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_PC_PIPE_BUF</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">For
 a FIFO or a pipe, this yields a value that applies to the referenced 
file. For a directory, the value applies to a FIFO created in that 
directory. Behavior for other file types is unspecified.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">Example 11-2 shows the use of <span class="docEmphasis">fpathconf()</span>
 to retrieve various limits for the file referred to by its standard 
input. When we run this program specifying standard input as a directory
 on an <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span> file system, we see the following:</p><pre>$ <b>./t_fpathconf &lt; .</b>
_PC_NAME_MAX:  255
_PC_PATH_MAX:  4096
_PC_PIPE_BUF:  4096</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ESHBI">Example 11-2. Using <span class="docEmphasis">fpathconf()</span></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>syslim/t_fpathconf.c</b>
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

static void             /* Print 'msg' plus value of fpathconf(fd, name) */
fpathconfPrint(const char *msg, int fd, int name)
{
    long lim;

    errno = 0;
    lim = fpathconf(fd, name);
    if (lim != -1) {        /* Call succeeded, limit determinate */
        printf("%s %ld\n", msg, lim);
    } else {
        if (errno == 0)     /* Call succeeded, limit indeterminate */
            printf("%s (indeterminate)\n", msg);
        else                /* Call failed */
            errExit("fpathconf %s", msg);
    }
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    fpathconfPrint("_PC_NAME_MAX: ", STDIN_FILENO, _PC_NAME_MAX);
    fpathconfPrint("_PC_PATH_MAX: ", STDIN_FILENO, _PC_PATH_MAX);
    fpathconfPrint("_PC_PIPE_BUF: ", STDIN_FILENO, _PC_PIPE_BUF);
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>syslim/t_fpathconf.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
