<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>11.4. Indeterminate Limits</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">11.4. Indeterminate Limits</h3><p class="docText">On occasion, we may find that some system limit is not defined by an implementation limit constant (e.g., <tt>PATH_MAX</tt>), and that <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">pathconf()</span> informs us that the limit (e.g., <tt>_PC_PATH_MAX</tt>) is indeterminate. In this case, we can employ one of the following strategies:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">When
 writing an application to be portable across multiple UNIX 
implementations, we could elect to use the minimum limit value specified
 by SUSv3. These are the constants with names of the form <tt>_POSIX_*_MAX</tt>,
 described in Section 11.1. Sometimes, this approach may not be viable 
because the limit is unrealistically low, as in the cases of <tt>_POSIX_PATH_MAX</tt> and <tt>_POSIX_OPEN_MAX</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">In
 some cases, a practical solution may be to ignore the checking of 
limits, and instead perform the relevant system or library function 
call. (Similar arguments can also apply with respect to some of the 
SUSv3 options described in Section 11.5.) If the call fails and <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>
 indicates that the error occurred because some system limit was 
exceeded, then we can try again, modifying the application behavior as 
necessary. For example, most UNIX implementations impose a limit on the 
number of realtime signals that can be queued to a process. Once this 
limit is reached, attempts to send further signals (using <span class="docEmphasis">sigqueue()</span>) fail with the error <tt>EAGAIN</tt>.
 In this case, the sending process could simply retry, perhaps after 
some delay interval. Similarly, attempting to open a file whose name is 
too long yields the error <tt>ENAMETOOLONG</tt>, and an application could deal with this by trying again with a shorter name.</p></li><li><p class="docList">We can write our own program or function to either deduce or estimate the limit. In each case, the relevant <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">pathconf()</span>
 call is made, and if this limit is indeterminate, the function returns a
 “good guess” value. While not perfect, such a solution is often viable 
in practice.</p></li><li><p class="docList">We can employ a tool such as GNU <span class="docEmphasis">Autoconf</span>,
 an extensible tool that can determine the existence and settings of 
various system features and limits. The Autoconf program produces header
 files based on the information it determines, and these files can then 
be included in C programs. Further information about Autoconf can be 
found at http://www.gnu.org/software/autoconf/.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
