<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>11.5. System Options</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">11.5. System Options</h3><p class="docText">As
 well as specifying limits for various system resources, SUSv3 also 
specifies various options that a UNIX implementation may support. These 
include support for features such as realtime signals, POSIX shared 
memory, job control, and POSIX threads. With a few exceptions, 
implementations are not required to support these options. Instead, 
SUSv3 allows an implementation to advise—at both compile time and run 
time—whether it supports a particular feature.</p><p class="docText">An implementation can advertise support for a particular SUSv3 option at compile time by defining a corresponding constant in <tt>&lt;unistd.h&gt;</tt>. Each such constant starts with a prefix that indicates the standard from which it originates (e.g., <tt>_POSIX_</tt> or <tt>_XOPEN_</tt>).</p><p class="docText">Each option constant, if defined, has one of the following values:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">A value of -1 means that <span class="docEmphasis">the option is not supported</span>.
 In this case, header files, data types, and function interfaces 
associated with the option need not be defined by the implementation. We
 may need to handle this possibility by conditional compilation using <tt>#if</tt> preprocessor directives.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A value of 0 means that <span class="docEmphasis">the option may be supported</span>. An application must check at run time to see whether the option is supported.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A value greater than 0 means that <span class="docEmphasis">the option is supported</span>.
 All header files, data types, and function interfaces associated with 
this option are defined and behave as specified. In many cases, SUSv3 
requires that this positive value be <tt>200112L</tt>,
 a constant corresponding to the year and month number in which SUSv3 
was approved as a standard. (The analogous value for SUSv4 is <tt>200809L</tt>.)</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Where a constant is defined with the value 0, an application can use the <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">pathconf()</span> (or <span class="docEmphasis">fpathconf()</span>) functions to check at run time whether the option is supported. The <span class="docEmphasis">name</span>
 arguments passed to these functions generally have the same form as the
 corresponding compile-time constants, but with the prefix replaced by <tt>_SC_</tt> or <tt>_PC_</tt>.
 The implementation must provide at least the header files, constants, 
and function interfaces necessary to perform the run-time check.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">SUSv3
 is unclear on whether an undefined option constant has the same meaning
 as defining the constant with the value 0 (“the option may be 
supported”) or with the value -1 (“the option is not supported”). The 
standards committee subsequently resolved that this case should mean the
 same as defining the constant with the value -1, and SUSv4 states this 
explicitly.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Table 11-3
 lists some of the options specified in SUSv3. The first column of the 
table gives the name of the associated compile-time constant for the 
option (defined in <tt>&lt;unistd.h&gt;</tt>), as well as the corresponding <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span> (<tt>_SC_*</tt>) or <span class="docEmphasis">pathconf()</span> (<tt>_PC_*</tt>) <span class="docEmphasis">name</span> argument. Note the following points regarding specific options:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Certain
 options are required by SUSv3; that is, the compile-time constant 
always evaluates to a value greater than 0. Historically, these options 
were truly optional, but nowadays they are not. These options are marked
 with the character <tt>+</tt> in the <span class="docEmphasis">Notes</span> column. (In SUSv4, a range of options that were optional in SUSv3 become mandatory.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Although
 such options are required by SUSv3, some UNIX systems may nevertheless 
be installed in a nonconforming configuration. Thus, for portable 
applications, it may be worth checking whether an option that affects 
the application is supported, regardless of whether the standard 
requires that option.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li><li><p class="docList">For
 certain options, the compile-time constant must have a value other than
 -1. In other words, either the option must be supported or support at 
run time must be checkable. These options are marked with the character <tt>*</tt> in the <span class="docEmphasis">Notes</span> column.</p></li></ul><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 11-3. Selected SUSv3 options</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Option (constant) name (<span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span> / <span class="docEmphasis">pathconf()</span> name)</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Description</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Notes</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_POSIX_ASYNCHRONOUS_IO (_SC_ASYNCHRONOUS_IO)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">Asynchronous I/O</span></td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_POSIX_CHOWN_RESTRICTED (_PC_CHOWN_RESTRICTED)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Only privileged processes can use <span class="docEmphasis">chown()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fchown()</span> to change the user ID and group ID of a file to arbitrary values (Section 15.3.2)</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>*</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_POSIX_JOB_CONTROL (_SC_JOB_CONTROL)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">Job Control</span> (Section 34.7)</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>+</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_POSIX_MESSAGE_PASSING (_SC_MESSAGE_PASSING)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">POSIX Message Queues</span> (Chapter 52)</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_POSIX_PRIORITY_SCHEDULING (_SC_PRIORITY_SCHEDULING)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">Process Scheduling</span> (Section 35.3)</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_POSIX_REALTIME_SIGNALS (_SC_REALTIME_SIGNALS)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">Realtime Signals Extension</span> (Section 22.8)</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_POSIX_SAVED_IDS</tt> (none)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Processes have saved set-user-IDs and saved set-group-IDs (Section 9.4)</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>+</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_POSIX_SEMAPHORES (_SC_SEMAPHORES)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">POSIX Semaphores</span> (Chapter 53)</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_POSIX_SHARED_MEMORY_OBJECTS (_SC_SHARED_MEMORY_OBJECTS)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">POSIX Shared Memory Objects</span>(Chapter 54)</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_POSIX_THREADS (_SC_THREADS)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">POSIX Threads</span></td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>_XOPEN_UNIX</tt> (<tt>_SC_XOPEN_UNIX</tt>)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">The XSI extension is supported (Section 1.3.4)</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
