<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>11.6. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">11.6. Summary</h3><p class="docText">SUSv3 specifies limits that an implementation may enforce and system options that an implementation may support.</p><p class="docText">Often,
 it is desirable not to hard-code assumptions about system limits and 
options into a program, since these may vary across implementations and 
also on a single implementation, either at run time or across file 
systems. Therefore, SUSv3 specifies methods by which an implementation 
can advertise the limits and options it supports. For most limits, SUSv3
 specifies a minimum value that all implementations must support. 
Additionally, each implementation can advertise its 
implementation-specific limits and options at compile time (via a 
constant definition in <tt>&lt;limits.h&gt;</tt> or <tt>&lt;unistd.h&gt;</tt>) and/or run time (via a call to <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">pathconf()</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">fpathconf()</span>).
 These techniques may similarly be used to find out which SUSv3 options 
an implementation supports. In some cases, it may not be possible to 
determine a particular limit using either of these methods. For such 
indeterminate limits, we must resort to ad hoc techniques to determine 
the limit to which an application should adhere.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWHBI">11.6.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E1HBI">11.6.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">Chapter 2 of [Stevens &amp; Rago, 2005] and Chapter 2
 of [Gallmeister, 1995] cover similar ground to this chapter. [Lewine, 
1991] also provides much useful (although now slightly outdated) 
background. Some information about POSIX options with notes on <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> and Linux details can be found at http://people.redhat.com/drepper/posix-option-groups.html. The following Linux manual pages are also relevant: <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf(3)</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">pathconf(3)</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">feature_test_macros(7)</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">posixoptions(7)</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">standards(7)</span>.</p><p class="docText">The best sources of information (though sometimes difficult reading) are the relevant parts of SUSv3, particularly Chapter 2 from the Base Definitions (XBD), and the specifications for <span class="docEmphasis">&lt;unistd.h&gt;</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">&lt;limits.h&gt;</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">fpathconf()</span>. [Josey, 2004] provides guidance on the use of SUSv3.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
