<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>12.2. System Identification: uname()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">12.2. System Identification: <span class="docEmphasis">uname()</span></h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">uname()</span>
 system call returns a range of identifying information about the host 
system on which an application is running, in the structure pointed to 
by <span class="docEmphasis">utsbuf</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/utsname.h&gt;

int <b>uname</b>(struct utsname *<span class="docEmphasis">utsbuf</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">utsbuf</span> argument is a pointer to a <span class="docEmphasis">utsname</span> structure, which is defined as follows:</p><pre>#define _UTSNAME_LENGTH 65

struct utsname {
    char sysname[_UTSNAME_LENGTH];      /* Implementation name */
    char nodename[_UTSNAME_LENGTH];     /* Node name on network */
    char release[_UTSNAME_LENGTH];      /* Implementation release level */
    char version[_UTSNAME_LENGTH];      /* Release version level */
    char machine[_UTSNAME_LENGTH];      /* Hardware on which system
                                           is running */
#ifdef _GNU_SOURCE                      /* Following is Linux-specific */
    char domainname[_UTSNAME_LENGTH];   /* NIS domain name of host */
#endif
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">SUSv3 specifies <span class="docEmphasis">uname()</span>, but leaves the lengths of the various fields of the <span class="docEmphasis">utsname</span>
 structure undefined, requiring only that the strings be terminated by a
 null byte. On Linux, these fields are each 65 bytes long, including 
space for the terminating null byte. On some UNIX implementations, these
 fields are shorter; on others (e.g., Solaris), they range up to 257 
bytes.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sysname</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">release</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">version</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">machine</span> fields of the <span class="docEmphasis">utsname</span> structure are automatically set by the kernel.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On Linux, three files in the directory <tt>/proc/sys/kernel</tt> provide access to the same information as is returned in the <span class="docEmphasis">sysname</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">release</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">version</span> fields of the <span class="docEmphasis">utsname</span> structure. These read-only files are, respectively, <tt>ostype</tt>, <tt>osrelease</tt>, and <tt>version</tt>. Another file, <tt>/proc/version</tt>,
 includes the same information as in these files, and also includes 
information about the kernel compilation step (i.e., the name of the 
user that performed the compilation, the name of host on which the 
compilation was performed, and the <span class="docEmphasis">gcc</span> version used).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">nodename</span> field returns the value that was set using the <span class="docEmphasis">sethostname()</span>
 system call (see the manual page for details of this system call). 
Often, this name is something like the hostname prefix from the system’s
 DNS domain name.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">domainname</span> field returns the value that was set using the <span class="docEmphasis">setdomainname()</span>
 system call (see the manual page for details of this system call). This
 is the Network Information Services (NIS) domain name of the host 
(which is not the same thing as the host’s DNS domain name).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">gethostname()</span> system call, which is the converse of <span class="docEmphasis">sethostname()</span>, retrieves the system hostname. The system hostname is also viewable and settable using the <span class="docEmphasis">hostname(1)</span> command and the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/hostname</tt> file.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getdomainname()</span> system call, which is the converse of <span class="docEmphasis">setdomainname()</span>, retrieves the NIS domain name. The NIS domain name is also viewable and settable using the <span class="docEmphasis">domainname(1)</span> command and the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/domainname</tt> file.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sethostname()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">setdomainname()</span>
 system calls are rarely used in application programs. Normally, the 
hostname and NIS domain name are established at boot time by startup 
scripts.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The program in Example 12-2 displays the information returned by <span class="docEmphasis">uname()</span>. Here’s an example of the output we might see when running this program:</p><pre>$ <b>./t_uname</b>
Node name:   tekapo
System name: Linux
Release:     2.6.30-default
Version:     #3 SMP Fri Jul 17 10:25:00 CEST 2009
Machine:     i686
Domain name:</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EJOBI">Example 12-2. Using <span class="docEmphasis">uname()</span></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre><b>sysinfo/t_uname.c</b>
#define _GNU_SOURCE
#include &lt;sys/utsname.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    struct utsname uts;

    if (uname(&amp;uts) == -1)
        errExit("uname");

    printf("Node name:   %s\n", uts.nodename);
    printf("System name: %s\n", uts.sysname);
    printf("Release:     %s\n", uts.release);
    printf("Version:     %s\n", uts.version);
    printf("Machine:     %s\n", uts.machine);
#ifdef _GNU_SOURCE
    printf("Domain name: %s\n", uts.domainname);
#endif
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
      <b>sysinfo/t_uname.c</b></pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
