<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>12.4. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">12.4. Exercises</h3><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write
 a program that lists the process ID and command name for all processes 
being run by the user named in the program’s command-line argument. (You
 may find the <span class="docEmphasis">userIdFromName()</span> function from Example 8-1, in Section 8.4.1.3, useful.) This can be done by inspecting the <span class="docEmphasis">Name:</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">Uid:</span> lines of all of the <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/status</tt> files on the system. Walking through all of the <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span> directories on the system requires the use of <span class="docEmphasis">readdir(3)</span>, which is described in Section 18.8. Make sure your program correctly handles the possibility that a <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span>
 directory disappears between the time that the program determines that 
the directory exists and the time that it tries to open the 
corresponding <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/status</tt> file.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write
 a program that draws a tree showing the hierarchical parent-child 
relationships of all processes on the system, going all the way back to <span class="docEmphasis">init</span>.
 For each process, the program should display the process ID and the 
command being executed. The output of the program should be similar to 
that produced by <span class="docEmphasis">pstree(1)</span>, although it does need not to be as sophisticated. The parent of each process on the system can be found by inspecting the <span class="docEmphasis">PPid:</span> line of all of the <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/status</tt> files on the system. Be careful to handle the possibility that a process’s parent (and thus its <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span> directory) disappears during the scan of all <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span> directories.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write
 a program that lists all processes that have a particular file pathname
 open. This can be achieved by inspecting the contents of all of the <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/fd/*</tt> symbolic links. This will require nested loops employing <span class="docEmphasis">readdir(3)</span> to scan all <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span> directories, and then the contents of all <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID/</span><tt>fd</tt> entries within each <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span> directory. To read the contents of a <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/fd/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">n</span> symbolic link requires the use of <span class="docEmphasis">readlink()</span>, described in Section 18.5.</p></div></li></ol></div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
