<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>13.2. Buffering in the stdio Library</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">13.2. Buffering in the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> Library</h3><p class="docText">Buffering of data into large blocks to reduce system calls is exactly what is done by the C library I/O functions (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">fprintf()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fscanf()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fgets()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fputs()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fputc()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fgetc()</span>) when operating on disk files. Thus, using the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> library relieves us of the task of buffering data for output with <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> or input via <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E2MBI">13.2.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E6MBI">13.2.1.1. Setting the buffering mode of a <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> stream</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">setvbuf()</span> function controls the form of buffering employed by the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> library.</p><pre>#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;

int <b>setvbuf</b>(FILE *<span class="docEmphasis">stream</span>, char *<span class="docEmphasis">buf</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span>, size_t <span class="docEmphasis">size</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or nonzero on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">stream</span> argument identifies the file stream whose buffering is to be modified. After the stream has been opened, the <span class="docEmphasis">setvbuf()</span> call must be made before calling any other <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> function on the stream. The <span class="docEmphasis">setvbuf()</span> call affects the behavior of all subsequent <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> operations on the specified stream.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The streams used by the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span>
 library should not be confused with the STREAMS facility of System V. 
The System V STREAMS facility is not implemented in the mainline Linux 
kernel.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">buf</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">size</span> arguments specify the buffer to be used for <span class="docEmphasis">stream</span>. These arguments may be specified in two ways:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">If <span class="docEmphasis">buf</span> is non-<tt>NULL</tt>, then it points to a block of memory of <span class="docEmphasis">size</span> bytes that is to be used as the buffer for <span class="docEmphasis">stream</span>. Since the buffer pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">buf</span> is then used by the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> library, it should be either statically allocated or dynamically allocated on the heap (using <span class="docEmphasis">malloc()</span>
 or similar). It should not be allocated as a local function variable on
 the stack, since chaos will result when that function returns and its 
stack frame is deallocated.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If <span class="docEmphasis">buf</span> is <tt>NULL</tt>, then the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> library automatically allocates a buffer for use with <span class="docEmphasis">stream</span> (unless we select unbuffered I/O, as described below). SUSv3 permits, but does not require, an implementation to use <span class="docEmphasis">size</span> to determine the size for this buffer. In the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> implementation, <span class="docEmphasis">size</span> is ignored in this case.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> argument specifies the type of buffering and has one of the following values:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">_IONBF</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Don’t buffer I/O. Each <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> library call results in an immediate <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> system call. The <span class="docEmphasis">buf</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">size</span> arguments are ignored, and can be specified as <tt>NULL</tt> and 0, respectively. This is the default for <span class="docEmphasis">stderr</span>, so that error output is guaranteed to appear immediately.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">_IOLBF</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Employ
 line-buffered I/O. This flag is the default for streams referring to 
terminal devices. For output streams, data is buffered until a newline 
character is output (unless the buffer fills first). For input streams, 
data is read a line at a time.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">_IOFBF</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Employ fully buffered I/O. Data is read or written (via calls to <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>) in units equal to the size of the buffer. This mode is the default for streams referring to disk files.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">The following code demonstrates the use of <span class="docEmphasis">setvbuf()</span>:</p><pre>#define BUF_SIZE 1024
static char buf[BUF_SIZE];

if (setvbuf(stdout, buf, _IOFBF, BUF_SIZE) != 0)
    errExit("setvbuf");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that <span class="docEmphasis">setvbuf()</span> returns a nonzero value (not necessarily -1) on error.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">setbuf()</span> function is layered on top of <span class="docEmphasis">setvbuf()</span>, and performs a similar task.</p><pre>#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;

void <b>setbuf</b>(FILE *<span class="docEmphasis">stream</span>, char *<span class="docEmphasis">buf</span>);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Other than the fact that it doesn’t return a function result, the call <span class="docEmphasis">setbuf(fp, buf)</span> is equivalent to:</p><pre>setvbuf(fp, buf, (buf != NULL) ? _IOFBF: _IONBF, BUFSIZ);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">buf</span> argument is specified either as <tt>NULL</tt>, for no buffering, or as a pointer to a caller-allocated buffer of <tt>BUFSIZ</tt> bytes. (<tt>BUFSIZ</tt> is defined in <tt>&lt;stdio.h&gt;</tt>. In the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> implementation, this constant has the value 8192, which is typical.)</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">setbuffer()</span> function is similar to <span class="docEmphasis">setbuf()</span>, but allows the caller to specify the size of <span class="docEmphasis">buf</span>.</p><pre>#define _BSD_SOURCE
#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;

void <b>setbuffer</b>(FILE *<span class="docEmphasis">stream</span>, char *<span class="docEmphasis">buf</span>, size_t <span class="docEmphasis">size</span>);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The call <span class="docEmphasis">setbuffer(fp, buf, size)</span> is equivalent to the following:</p><pre>setvbuf(fp, buf, (buf != NULL) ? _IOFBF : _IONBF, size);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">setbuffer()</span> function is not specified in SUSv3, but is available on most UNIX implementations.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EVVBI">13.2.1.2. Flushing a <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffer</h5><p class="docText">Regardless of the current buffering mode, at any time, we can force the data in a <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> output stream to be written (i.e., flushed to a kernel buffer via <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>) using the <span class="docEmphasis">fflush()</span> library function. This function flushes the output buffer for the specified <span class="docEmphasis">stream</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;

int <b>fflush</b>(FILE *<span class="docEmphasis">stream</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, <tt>EOF</tt> on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If <span class="docEmphasis">stream</span> is <tt>NULL</tt>, <span class="docEmphasis">fflush()</span> flushes all <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffers.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">fflush()</span>
 function can also be applied to an input stream. This causes any 
buffered input to be discarded. (The buffer will be refilled when the 
program next tries to read from the stream.)</p><p class="docText">A <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffer is automatically flushed when the corresponding stream is closed.</p><p class="docText">In many C library implementations, including <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>, if <span class="docEmphasis">stdin</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">stdout</span> refer to a terminal, then an implicit <span class="docEmphasis">fflush(stdout)</span> is performed whenever input is read from <span class="docEmphasis">stdin</span>. This has the effect of flushing any prompts written to <span class="docEmphasis">stdout</span> that don’t include a terminating newline character (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">printf(“Date: ”)</span>).
 However, this behavior is not specified in SUSv3 or C99 and is not 
implemented in all C libraries. Portable programs should use explicit <span class="docEmphasis">fflush(stdout)</span> calls to ensure that such prompts are displayed.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The
 C99 standard makes two requirements if a stream is opened for both 
input and output. First, an output operation can’t be directly followed 
by an input operation without an intervening call to <span class="docEmphasis">fflush()</span> or one of the file-positioning functions (<span class="docEmphasis">fseek()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fsetpos()</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">rewind()</span>).
 Second, an input operation can’t be directly followed by an output 
operation without an intervening call to one of the file-positioning 
functions, unless the input operation encountered end-of-file.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
