<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>13.3. Controlling Kernel Buffering of File I/O</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">13.3. Controlling Kernel Buffering of File I/O</h3><p class="docText">It
 is possible to force flushing of kernel buffers for output files. 
Sometimes, this is necessary if an application (e.g., a database 
journaling process) must ensure that output really has been written to 
the disk (or at least to the disk’s hardware cache) before continuing.</p><p class="docText">Before
 we describe the system calls used to control kernel buffering, it is 
useful to consider a few relevant definitions from SUSv3.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EXNBI">13.3.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E2NBI">13.3.1.1. Synchronized I/O data integrity and synchronized I/O file integrity</h5><p class="docText">SUSv3 defines the term <span class="docEmphasis">synchronized I/O completion</span> to mean “an I/O operation that has either been successfully transferred [to the disk] or diagnosed as unsuccessful.”</p><p class="docText">SUSv3 defines two different types of synchronized I/O completion. The difference between the types involves the <span class="docEmphasis">metadata</span>
 (“data about data”) describing the file, which the kernel stores along 
with the data for a file. We consider file metadata in detail when we 
look at file i-nodes in Section 14.4,
 but for now, it is sufficient to note that the file metadata includes 
information such as the file owner and group; file permissions; file 
size; number of (hard) links to the file; timestamps indicating the time
 of the last file access, last file modification, and last metadata 
change; and file data block pointers.</p><p class="docText">The first type of synchronized I/O completion defined by SUSv3 is <span class="docEmphasis">synchronized I/O data integrity completion</span>.
 This is concerned with ensuring that a file data update transfers 
sufficient information to allow a later retrieval of that data to 
proceed.</p><ul><li><p class="docList">For
 a read operation, this means that the requested file data has been 
transferred (from the disk) to the process. If there were any pending 
write operations affecting the requested data, these are transferred to 
the disk before performing the read.</p></li><li><p class="docList">For
 a write operation, this means that the data specified in the write 
request has been transferred (to the disk) and all file metadata 
required to retrieve that data has also been transferred. The key point 
to note here is that not all modified file metadata attributes need to 
be transferred to allow the file data to be retrieved. An example of a 
modified file metadata attribute that would need to be transferred is 
the file size (if the write operation extended the file). By contrast, 
modified file timestamps would not need to be transferred to disk before
 a subsequent data retrieval could proceed.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The other type of synchronized I/O completion defined by SUSv3 is <span class="docEmphasis">synchronized I/O file integrity completion</span>,
 which is a superset of synchronized I/O data integrity completion. The 
difference with this mode of I/O completion is that during a file 
update, <span class="docEmphasis">all</span> updated
 file metadata is transferred to disk, even if it is not necessary for 
the operation of a subsequent read of the file data.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ELPBI">13.3.1.2. System calls for controlling kernel buffering of file I/O</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">fsync()</span> system call causes the buffered data and all metadata associated with the open file descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span> to be flushed to disk. Calling <span class="docEmphasis">fsync()</span> forces the file to the synchronized I/O file integrity completion state.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

int <b>fsync</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">An <span class="docEmphasis">fsync()</span> call returns only after the transfer to the disk device (or at least its cache) has completed.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">fdatasync()</span> system call operates similarly to <span class="docEmphasis">fsync()</span>, but only forces the file to the synchronized I/O data integrity completion state.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

int <b>fdatasync</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Using <span class="docEmphasis">fdatasync()</span> potentially reduces the number of disk operations from the two required by <span class="docEmphasis">fsync()</span> to one. For example, if the file data has changed, but the file size has not, then calling <span class="docEmphasis">fdatasync()</span>
 only forces the data to be updated. (We noted above that changes to 
file metadata attributes such as the last modification timestamp don’t 
need to be transferred for synchronized I/O data completion.) By 
contrast, calling <span class="docEmphasis">fsync()</span> would also force the metadata to be transferred to disk.</p><p class="docText">Reducing
 the number of disk I/O operations in this manner is useful for certain 
applications in which performance is crucial and the accurate 
maintenance of certain metadata (such as timestamps) is not essential. 
This can make a considerable performance difference for applications 
that are making multiple file updates: because the file data and 
metadata normally reside on different parts of the disk, updating them 
both would require repeated seek operations backward and forward across 
the disk.</p><p class="docText">In Linux 2.2 and earlier, <span class="docEmphasis">fdatasync()</span> is implemented as a call to <span class="docEmphasis">fsync()</span>, and thus carries no performance gain.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Starting with kernel 2.6.17, Linux provides the nonstandard <span class="docEmphasis">sync_file_range()</span> system call, which allows more precise control than <span class="docEmphasis">fdatasync()</span>
 when flushing file data. The caller can specify the file region to be 
flushed, and specify flags controlling whether the system call blocks on
 disk writes. See the <span class="docEmphasis">sync_file_range(2)</span> manual page for further details.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sync()</span>
 system call causes all kernel buffers containing updated file 
information (i.e., data blocks, pointer blocks, metadata, and so on) to 
be flushed to disk.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

void <b>sync</b>(void);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In the Linux implementation, <span class="docEmphasis">sync()</span>
 returns only after all data has been transferred to the disk device (or
 at least to its cache). However, SUSv3 permits an implementation of <span class="docEmphasis">sync()</span> to simply schedule the I/O transfer and return before it has completed.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">A
 permanently running kernel thread ensures that modified kernel buffers 
are flushed to disk if they are not explicitly synchronized within 30 
seconds. This is done to ensure that buffers don’t remain unsynchronized
 with the corresponding disk file (and thus vulnerable to loss in the 
event of a system crash) for long periods. In Linux 2.6, this task is 
performed by the <span class="docEmphasis">pdflush</span> kernel thread. (In Linux 2.4, it is performed by the <span class="docEmphasis">kupdated</span> kernel thread.)</p><p class="docText">The file <tt>/proc/sys/vm/dirty_expire_centisecs</tt> specifies the age (in hundredths of a second) that a dirty buffer must reach before it is flushed by <span class="docEmphasis">pdflush</span>. Additional files in the same directory control other aspects of the operation of <span class="docEmphasis">pdflush</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EMUBI">13.3.1.3. Making all writes synchronous: <tt>O_SYNC</tt></h5><p class="docText">Specifying the <tt>O_SYNC</tt> flag when calling <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> makes all subsequent output <span class="docEmphasis">synchronous</span>:</p><pre>fd = open(pathname, O_WRONLY | O_SYNC);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">After this <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> call, every <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>
 to the file automatically flushes the file data and metadata to the 
disk (i.e., writes are performed according to synchronized I/O file 
integrity completion).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Older BSD systems used the <tt>O_FSYNC</tt> flag to provide <tt>O_SYNC</tt> functionality. In <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>, <tt>O_FSYNC</tt> is defined as a synonym for <tt>O_SYNC</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EWWBI">13.3.1.4. Performance impact of <tt>O_SYNC</tt></h5><p class="docText">Using the <tt>O_SYNC</tt> flag (or making frequent calls to <span class="docEmphasis">fsync()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fdatasync()</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">sync()</span>) can strongly affect performance. Table 13-3 shows the time required to write 1 million bytes to a newly created file (on an <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span> file system) for a range of buffer sizes with and without <tt>O_SYNC</tt>. The results were obtained (using the <tt>filebuff/write_bytes.c</tt> program provided in the source code distribution for this book) using a vanilla 2.6.30 kernel and an <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span> file system with a block size of 4096 bytes. Each row shows the average of 20 runs for the given buffer size.</p><p class="docText">As can be seen from the table, <tt>O_SYNC</tt>
 increases elapsed times enormously—in the 1-byte buffer case, by a 
factor of more than 1000. Note also the large differences between the 
elapsed and CPU times for writes with <tt>O_SYNC</tt>. This is a consequence of the program being blocked while each buffer is actually transferred to disk.</p><p class="docText">The results shown in Table 13-3 omit a further factor that affects performance when using <tt>O_SYNC</tt>. Modern disk drives have large internal caches, and by default, <tt>O_SYNC</tt> merely causes data to be transferred to the cache. If we disable caching on the disk (using the command <span class="docEmphasis">hdparm -W0</span>), then the performance impact of <tt>O_SYNC</tt>
 becomes even more extreme. In the 1-byte case, the elapsed time rises 
from 1030 seconds to around 16,000 seconds. In the 4096-byte case, the 
elapsed time rises from 0.34 seconds to 4 seconds.</p><p class="docText">In
 summary, if we need to force flushing of kernel buffers, we should 
consider whether we can design our application to use large <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> buffer sizes or make judicious use of occasional calls to <span class="docEmphasis">fsync()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">fdatasync()</span>, instead of using the <tt>O_SYNC</tt> flag when opening the file.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 13-3. Impact of the <tt>O_SYNC</tt> flag on the speed of writing 1 million bytes</h5></caption><colgroup span="5"><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" rowspan="3" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom"><tt>BUF_SIZE</tt></th><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" colspan="4" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom">Time required (seconds)</th></tr><tr><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" colspan="2" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom">Without <tt>O_SYNC</tt></th><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" colspan="2" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom">With <tt>O_SYNC</tt></th></tr><tr><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom">Elapsed</th><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom">Total CPU</th><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom">Elapsed</th><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom">Total CPU</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>1</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>0.73</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>0.73</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>1030</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>98.8</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>16</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>0.05</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>0.05</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>65.0</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>0.40</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>256</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>0.02</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>0.02</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>4.07</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>0.03</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>4096</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>0.01</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>0.01</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>0.34</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>0.03</tt></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EMACI">13.3.1.5. The <tt>O_DSYNC</tt> and <tt>O_RSYNC</tt> flags</h5><p class="docText">SUSv3 specifies two further open file status flags related to synchronized I/O: <tt>O_DSYNC</tt> and <tt>O_RSYNC</tt>.</p><p class="docText">The <tt>O_DSYNC</tt> flag causes writes to be performed according to the requirements of synchronized I/O data integrity completion (like <span class="docEmphasis">fdatasync()</span>). This contrasts with <tt>O_SYNC</tt>, which causes writes to be performed according to the requirements of synchronized I/O file integrity completion (like <span class="docEmphasis">fsync()</span>).</p><p class="docText">The <tt>O_RSYNC</tt> flag is specified in conjunction with either <tt>O_SYNC</tt> or <tt>O_DSYNC</tt>, and extends the write behaviors of these flags to read operations. Specifying both <tt>O_RSYNC</tt> and <tt>O_DSYNC</tt>
 when opening a file means that all subsequent reads are completed 
according to the requirements of synchronized I/O data integrity (i.e., 
prior to performing the read, all pending file writes are completed as 
though carried out with <tt>O_DSYNC</tt>). Specifying both <tt>O_RSYNC</tt> and <tt>O_SYNC</tt>
 when opening a file means that all subsequent reads are completed 
according to the requirements of synchronized I/O file integrity (i.e., 
prior to performing the read, all pending file writes are completed as 
though carried out with <tt>O_SYNC</tt>).</p><p class="docText">Before kernel 2.6.33, the <tt>O_DSYNC</tt> and <tt>O_RSYNC</tt> flags were not implemented on Linux, and the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> headers defined these constants to be the same as <tt>O_SYNC</tt>. (This isn’t actually correct in the case of <tt>O_RSYNC</tt>, since <tt>O_SYNC</tt> doesn’t provide any functionality for read operations.)</p><p class="docText">Starting with kernel 2.6.33, Linux implements <tt>O_DSYNC</tt>, and an implementation of <tt>O_RSYNC</tt> is likely to be added in a future kernel release.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Before kernel 2.6.33, Linux didn’t fully implement <tt>O_SYNC</tt> semantics. Instead, <tt>O_SYNC</tt> was implemented as <tt>O_DSYNC</tt>.
 To maintain consistent behavior for applications that were built for 
older kernels, applications that were linked against older versions of 
the GNU C library continue to provide <tt>O_DSYNC</tt> semantics for <tt>O_SYNC</tt>, even on Linux 2.6.33 and later.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
