<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>13.5. Advising the Kernel About I/O Patterns</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">13.5. Advising the Kernel About I/O Patterns</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">posix_fadvise()</span> system call allows a process to inform the kernel about its likely pattern for accessing file data.</p><pre>#include &lt;fcntl.h&gt;

int <b>posix_fadvise</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, off_t <span class="docEmphasis">offset</span>, off_t <span class="docEmphasis">len</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">advice</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or a positive error number on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The kernel may (but is not obliged to) use the information provided by <span class="docEmphasis">posix_fadvise()</span>
 to optimize its use of the buffer cache, thereby improving I/O 
performance for the process and for the system as a whole. Calling <span class="docEmphasis">posix_fadvise()</span> has no effect on the semantics of a program.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span> argument is a file descriptor identifying the file about whose access patterns we wish to inform the kernel. The <span class="docEmphasis">offset</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">len</span> arguments identify the region of the file about which advice is being given: <span class="docEmphasis">offset</span> specifies the starting offset of the region, and <span class="docEmphasis">len</span> specifies the size of the region in bytes. A <span class="docEmphasis">len</span> value of 0 means all bytes from <span class="docEmphasis">offset</span> through to the end of the file. (In kernels before 2.6.6, a <span class="docEmphasis">len</span> of 0 was interpreted literally as zero bytes.)</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">advice</span> argument indicates the process’s expected pattern of access for the file. It is specified as one of the following:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">POSIX_FADV_NORMAL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The
 process has no special advice to give about access patterns. This is 
the default behavior if no advice is given for the file. On Linux, this 
operation sets the file read-ahead window to the default size (128 kB).</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">POSIX_FADV_SEQUENTIAL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The
 process expects to read data sequentially from lower offsets to higher 
offsets. On Linux, this operation sets the file read-ahead window to the
 twice the default size.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">POSIX_FADV_RANDOM</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The process expects to access the data in random order. On Linux, this option disables file read-ahead.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">POSIX_FADV_WILLNEED</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The
 process expects to access the specified file region in the near future.
 The kernel performs read-ahead to populate the buffer cache with file 
data in the range specified by <span class="docEmphasis">offset</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">len</span>. Subsequent <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>
 calls on the file don’t block on disk I/O; instead, they simply fetch 
data from the buffer cache. The kernel provides no guarantees about how 
long the data fetched from the file will remain resident in the buffer 
cache. If other processes or kernel activities place a sufficiently 
strong demand on memory, then the pages will eventually be reused. In 
other words, if memory pressure is high, then we should ensure that the 
elapsed time between the <span class="docEmphasis">posix_fadvise()</span> call and the subsequent <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> call(s) is short. (The Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">readahead()</span> system call provides functionality equivalent to the <tt>POSIX_FADV_WILLNEED</tt> operation.)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">POSIX_FADV_DONTNEED</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The
 process expects not to access the specified file region in the near 
future. This advises the kernel that it can free the corresponding cache
 pages (if there are any). On Linux, this operation is performed in two 
steps. First, if the underlying device is not currently congested with a
 series of queued write operations, the kernel flushes any modified 
pages in the specified region. Second, the kernel attempts to free any 
cache pages for the region. For modified pages in the region, this 
second step will succeed only if the pages have been written to the 
underlying device in the first step—that is, if the device’s write queue
 was not congested. Since congestion on the device can’t be controlled 
by the application, an alternate way of ensuring that the cache pages 
can be freed is to precede the <tt>POSIX_FADV_DONTNEED</tt> operation with a <span class="docEmphasis">sync()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">fdatasync()</span> call that specifies <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">POSIX_FADV_NOREUSE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The
 process expects to access data in the specified file region once, and 
then not to reuse it. This hint tells the kernel that it can free the 
pages after they have been accessed once. On Linux, this operation 
currently has no effect.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">The specification of <span class="docEmphasis">posix_fadvise()</span> is new in SUSv3, and not all UNIX implementations support this interface. Linux provides <span class="docEmphasis">posix_fadvise()</span> since kernel 2.6.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
