<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>13.6. Bypassing the Buffer Cache: Direct I/O</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">13.6. Bypassing the Buffer Cache: Direct I/O</h3><p class="docText">Starting
 with kernel 2.4, Linux allows an application to bypass the buffer cache
 when performing disk I/O, thus transferring data directly from user 
space to a file or disk device. This is sometimes termed <span class="docEmphasis">direct I/O</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">raw I/O</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The
 details described here are Linux-specific and are not standardized by 
SUSv3. Nevertheless, most UNIX implementations provide some form of 
direct I/O access to devices and files.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Direct
 I/O is sometimes misunderstood as being a means of obtaining fast I/O 
performance. However, for most applications, using direct I/O can 
considerably degrade performance. This is because the kernel applies a 
number of optimizations to improve the performance of I/O done via the 
buffer cache, including performing sequential read-ahead, performing I/O
 in clusters of disk blocks, and allowing processes accessing the same 
file to share buffers in the cache. All of these optimizations are lost 
when we use direct I/O. Direct I/O is intended only for applications 
with specialized I/O requirements. For example, database systems that 
perform their own caching and I/O optimizations don’t need the kernel to
 consume CPU time and memory performing the same tasks.</p><p class="docText">We can perform direct I/O either on an individual file or on a block device (e.g., a disk). To do this, we specify the <tt>O_DIRECT</tt> flag when opening the file or device with <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>.</p><p class="docText">The <tt>O_DIRECT</tt>
 flag is effective since kernel 2.4.10. Not all Linux file systems and 
kernel versions support the use of this flag. Most native file systems 
support <tt>O_DIRECT</tt>, but many non-UNIX 
file systems (e.g., VFAT) do not. It may be necessary to test the file 
system concerned (if a file system doesn’t support <tt>O_DIRECT</tt>, then <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> fails with the error <tt>EINVAL</tt>) or read the kernel source code to check for this support.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">If a file is opened with <tt>O_DIRECT</tt>
 by one process, and opened normally (i.e., so that the buffer cache is 
used) by another process, then there is no coherency between the 
contents of the buffer cache and the data read or written via direct 
I/O. Such scenarios should be avoided.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">raw(8)</span> manual page describes an older (now deprecated) technique for obtaining raw access to a disk device.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETTBI">13.6.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EXTBI">13.6.1.1. Alignment restrictions for direct I/O</h5><p class="docText">Because
 direct I/O (on both disk devices and files) involves direct access to 
the disk, we must observe a number of restrictions when performing I/O:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The data buffer being transferred must be aligned on a memory boundary that is a multiple of the block size.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The file or device offset at which data transfer commences must be a multiple of the block size.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The length of the data to be transferred must be a multiple of the block size.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Failure to observe any of these restrictions results in the error <tt>EINVAL</tt>. In the above list, <span class="docEmphasis">block size</span> means the physical block size of the device (typically 512 bytes).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">When
 performing direct I/O, Linux 2.4 is more restrictive than Linux 2.6: 
the alignment, length, and offset must be multiples of the <span class="docEmphasis">logical</span> block size of the underlying file system. (Typical file system logical block sizes are 1024, 2048, or 4096 bytes.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ERUBI">13.6.1.2. Example program</h5><p class="docText">Example 13-1 provides a simple example of the use of <tt>O_DIRECT</tt>
 while opening a file for reading. This program takes up to four 
command-line arguments specifying, in order, the file to be read, the 
number of bytes to be read from the file, the offset to which the 
program should seek before reading from the file, and the alignment of 
the data buffer passed to <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>.
 The last two arguments are optional, and default to offset 0 and 4096 
bytes, respectively. Here are some examples of what we see when we run 
this program:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>./direct_read /test/x 512 </b>                <i> Read 512 bytes at offset 0</i>
Read 512 bytes                              <i> Succeeds</i>
$ <b>./direct_read /test/x 256 </b>
ERROR [EINVAL Invalid argument] read        <i> Length is not a multiple of 512</i>
$ <b>./direct_read /test/x 512 1 </b>
ERROR [EINVAL Invalid argument] read        <i> Offset is not a multiple of 512</i>
$ <b>./direct_read /test/x 4096 8192 512 </b>
Read 4096 bytes                             <i> Succeeds</i>
$ <b>./direct_read /test/x 4096 512 256 </b>
ERROR [EINVAL Invalid argument] read        <i> Alignment is not a multiple of 512</i>

					  </pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The program in Example 13-1 uses the <span class="docEmphasis">memalign()</span> function to allocate a block of memory aligned on a multiple of its first argument. We describe <span class="docEmphasis">memalign()</span> in Section 7.1.4.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E3WBI">Example 13-1. Using <tt>O_DIRECT</tt> to bypass the buffer cache</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>filebuff/direct_read.c</b>
#define _GNU_SOURCE     /* Obtain O_DIRECT definition from &lt;fcntl.h&gt; */
#include &lt;fcntl.h&gt;
#include &lt;malloc.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int fd;
    ssize_t numRead;
    size_t length, alignment;
    off_t offset;
    char *buf;

    if (argc &lt; 3 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s file length [offset [alignment]]\n", argv[0]);

    length = getLong(argv[2], GN_ANY_BASE, "length");
    offset = (argc &gt; 3) ? getLong(argv[3], GN_ANY_BASE, "offset") : 0;
    alignment = (argc &gt; 4) ? getLong(argv[4], GN_ANY_BASE, "alignment") : 4096;

    fd = open(argv[1], O_RDONLY | O_DIRECT);
    if (fd == -1)
        errExit("open");

    /* memalign() allocates a block of memory aligned on an address that
      is a multiple of its first argument. By specifying this argument as
      2 * 'alignment' and then adding 'alignment' to the returned pointer,
      we ensure that 'buf' is aligned on a non-power-of-two multiple of
      'alignment'. We do this to ensure that if, for example, we ask
      for a 256-byte aligned buffer, we don't accidentally get a
      buffer that is also aligned on a 512-byte boundary. */

    buf = memalign(alignment * 2, length + alignment);
    if (buf == NULL)
        errExit("memalign");

    buf += alignment;

    if (lseek(fd, offset, SEEK_SET) == -1)
        errExit("lseek");

    numRead = read(fd, buf, length);
    if (numRead == -1)
        errExit("read");
    printf("Read %ld bytes\n", (long) numRead);

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>filebuff/direct_read.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
