<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>13.7. Mixing Library Functions and System Calls for File I/O</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">13.7. Mixing Library Functions and System Calls for File I/O</h3><p class="docText">It is possible to mix the use of system calls and the standard C library functions to perform I/O on the same file. The <span class="docEmphasis">fileno()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fdopen()</span> functions assist us with this task.</p><pre>#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;

int <b>fileno</b>(FILE *<span class="docEmphasis">stream</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns file descriptor on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><pre>FILE *<b>fdopen</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">mode</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns (new) file pointer on success, or <tt>NULL</tt> on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Given a stream, <span class="docEmphasis">fileno()</span> returns the corresponding file descriptor (i.e., the one that the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> library has opened for this stream). This file descriptor can then be used in the usual way with I/O system calls such as <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">dup()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">fdopen()</span> function is the converse of <span class="docEmphasis">fileno()</span>. Given a file descriptor, it creates a corresponding stream that uses this descriptor for its I/O. The <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> argument is the same as for <span class="docEmphasis">fopen()</span>; for example, <span class="docEmphasis">r</span> for read, <span class="docEmphasis">w</span> for write, or <span class="docEmphasis">a</span> for append. If this argument is not consistent with the access mode of the file descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, then <span class="docEmphasis">fdopen()</span> fails.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">fdopen()</span>
 function is especially useful for descriptors referring to files other 
than regular files. As we’ll see in later chapters, the system calls for
 creating sockets and pipes always return file descriptors. To use the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> library with these file types, we must use <span class="docEmphasis">fdopen()</span> to create a corresponding file stream.</p><p class="docText">When using the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span>
 library functions in conjunction with I/O system calls to perform I/O 
on disk files, we must keep buffering issues in mind. I/O system calls 
transfer data directly to the kernel buffer cache, while the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> library waits until the stream’s user-space buffer is full before calling <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> to transfer that buffer to the kernel buffer cache. Consider the following code used to write to standard output:</p><pre>printf("To man the world is twofold, ");
write(STDOUT_FILENO, "in accordance with his twofold attitude.\n", 41);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In the usual case, the output of the <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> will typically appear <span class="docEmphasis">after</span> the output of the <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>, so that this code yields the following output:</p><pre>in accordance with his twofold attitude.
To man the world is twofold,</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">When intermingling I/O system calls and <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> functions, judicious use of <span class="docEmphasis">fflush()</span> may be required to avoid this problem. We could also use <span class="docEmphasis">setvbuf()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">setbuf()</span>
 to disable buffering, but doing so might impact I/O performance for the
 application, since each output operation would then result in the 
execution of a <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> system call.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">SUSv3 goes to some length specifying the requirements for an application to be able to mix the use of I/O system calls and <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> functions. See the section headed <span class="docEmphasis">Interaction of File Descriptors and Standard I/O Streams</span> under the chapter <span class="docEmphasis">General Information</span> in the <span class="docEmphasis">System Interfaces</span> (XSH) volume for details.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
