<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>13.8. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">13.8. Summary</h3><p class="docText">Buffering of input and output data is performed by the kernel, and also by the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span>
 library. In some cases, we may wish to prevent buffering, but we need 
to be aware of the impact this has on application performance. Various 
system calls and library functions can be used to control kernel and <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffering and to perform one-off buffer flushes.</p><p class="docText">A process can use <span class="docEmphasis">posix_fadvise()</span>
 to advise the kernel of its likely pattern for accessing data from a 
specified file. The kernel may use this information to optimize the use 
of the buffer cache, thus improving I/O performance.</p><p class="docText">The Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> <tt>O_DIRECT</tt> flag allows specialized applications to bypass the buffer cache.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">fileno()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fdopen()</span>
 functions assist us with the task of mixing system calls and standard C
 library functions to perform I/O on the same file. Given a stream, <span class="docEmphasis">fileno()</span> returns the corresponding file descriptor; <span class="docEmphasis">fdopen()</span> performs the converse operation, creating a new stream that employs a specified open file descriptor.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6TBI">13.8.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EDUBI">13.8.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">[Bach,
 1986] describes the implementation and advantages of the buffer cache 
on System V. [Goodheart &amp; Cox, 1994] and [Vahalia, 1996] also 
describe the rationale and implementation of the System V buffer cache. 
Further relevant information specific to Linux can be found in [Bovet 
&amp; Cesati, 2005] and [Love, 2010].</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
