<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>13.9. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">13.9. Exercises</h3><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Using the <span class="docEmphasis">time</span> built-in command of the shell, try timing the operation of the program in Example 4-1 (<tt>copy.c</tt>) on your system.</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Experiment with different file and buffer sizes. You can set the buffer size using the <span class="docEmphasis">-DBUF_SIZE=nbytes</span> option when compiling the program.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Modify the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> system call to include the <tt>O_SYNC</tt> flag. How much difference does this make to the speed for various buffer sizes?</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Try performing these timing tests on a range of file systems (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">ext3</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">XFS</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">Btrfs</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">JFS</span>). Are the results similar? Are the trends the same when going from small to large buffer sizes?</p></div></li></ol></div></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Time the operation of the <tt>filebuff/write_bytes.c</tt> program (provided in the source code distribution for this book) for various buffer sizes and file systems.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">What is the effect of the following statements?</p><pre>fflush(fp);
fsync(fileno(fp));</pre><br/>
</div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Explain
 why the output of the following code differs depending on whether 
standard output is redirected to a terminal or to a disk file.</p><pre>printf("If I had more time, \n");
write(STDOUT_FILENO, "I would have written you a shorter letter.\n", 43);</pre><br/>
</div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The command <span class="docEmphasis">tail [ -n num ] file</span> prints the last <span class="docEmphasis">num</span> lines (ten by default) of the named file. Implement this command using I/O system calls (<span class="docEmphasis">lseek()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>, and so on). Keep in mind the buffering issues described in this chapter, in order to make the implementation efficient.</p></div></li></ol></div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
