<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 14. File Systems</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0EIUBI">Chapter 14. File Systems</h2><p class="docText">In Chapter 4, Chapter 5, and Chapter 13,
 we looked at file I/O, with a particular focus on regular (i.e., disk) 
files. In this and the following chapters, we go into detail on a range 
of file-related topics:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">This chapter looks at file systems.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Chapter 15 describes various attributes associated with a file, including the timestamps, ownership, and permissions.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Chapter 16
 and 17 consider two new features of Linux 2.6: extended attributes and 
access control lists (ACLs). Extended attributes are a method of 
associating arbitrary metadata with a file. ACLs are an extension of the
 traditional UNIX file permission model.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Chapter 18 looks at directories and links.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The
 majority of this chapter is concerned with file systems, which are 
organized collections of files and directories. We explain a range of 
file-system concepts, sometimes using the traditional Linux <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span> file system as a specific example. We also briefly describe some of the journaling file systems available on Linux.</p><p class="docText">We
 conclude the chapter with a discussion of the system calls used to 
mount and unmount a file system, and the library functions used to 
obtain information about mounted file systems.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
