<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>14.1. Device Special Files (Devices)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">14.1. Device Special Files (Devices)</h3><p class="docText">This chapter frequently mentions disk devices, so we start with a brief overview of the concept of a device file.</p><p class="docText">A
 device special file corresponds to a device on the system. Within the 
kernel, each device type has a corresponding device driver, which 
handles all I/O requests for the device. A <span class="docEmphasis">device driver</span>
 is a unit of kernel code that implements a set of operations that 
(normally) correspond to input and output actions on an associated piece
 of hardware. The API provided by device drivers is fixed, and includes 
operations corresponding to the system calls <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">close()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span>.
 The fact that each device driver provides a consistent interface, 
hiding the differences in operation of individual devices, allows for <span class="docEmphasis">universality of I/O</span> (Section 4.2).</p><p class="docText">Some devices are real, such as mice, disks, and tape drives. Others are <span class="docEmphasis">virtual</span>,
 meaning that there is no corresponding hardware; rather, the kernel 
provides (via a device driver) an abstract device with an API that is 
the same as a real device.</p><p class="docText">Devices can be divided into two types:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Character devices</span> handle data on a character-by-character basis. Terminals and keyboards are examples of character devices.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Block devices</span>
 handle data a block at a time. The size of a block depends on the type 
of device, but is typically some multiple of 512 bytes. Examples of 
block devices include disks and tape drives.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Device files appear within the file system, just like other files, usually under the <tt>/dev</tt> directory. The superuser can create a device file using the <span class="docEmphasis">mknod</span> command, and the same task can be performed in a privileged (<tt>CAP_MKNOD</tt>) program using the <span class="docEmphasis">mknod()</span> system call.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">We don’t describe the <span class="docEmphasis">mknod()</span>
 (“make file-system i-node”) system call in detail since its use is 
straightforward, and the only purpose for which it is required nowadays 
is to create device files, which is not a common application 
requirement. We can also use <span class="docEmphasis">mknod()</span> to create FIFOs (Section 44.7), but the <span class="docEmphasis">mkfifo()</span> function is preferred for this task. Historically, some UNIX implementations also used <span class="docEmphasis">mknod()</span> for creating directories, but this use has now been replaced by the <span class="docEmphasis">mkdir()</span> system call. Nevertheless, some UNIX implementations—but not Linux—preserve this capability in <span class="docEmphasis">mknod()</span> for backward compatibility. See the <span class="docEmphasis">mknod(2)</span> manual page for further details.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">In earlier versions of Linux, <tt>/dev</tt>
 contained entries for all possible devices on the system, even if such 
devices weren’t actually connected to the system. This meant that <tt>/dev</tt>
 could contain literally thousands of unused entries, slowing the task 
of programs that needed to scan the contents of that directory, and 
making it impossible to use the contents of the directory as a means of 
discovering which devices were actually present on the system. In Linux 
2.6, these problems are solved by the <span class="docEmphasis">udev</span> program. The <span class="docEmphasis">udev</span> program relies on the <span class="docEmphasis">sysfs</span>
 file system, which exports information about devices and other kernel 
objects into user space via a pseudo-file system mounted under <tt>/sys</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">[Kroah-Hartman, 2003] provides an overview of <span class="docEmphasis">udev</span>, and outlines the reasons it is considered superior to <span class="docEmphasis">devfs</span>, the Linux 2.4 solution to the same problems. Information about the <span class="docEmphasis">sysfs</span> file system can be found in the Linux 2.6 kernel source file <tt>Documentation/filesystems/sysfs.txt</tt> and in [Mochel, 2005].</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EO1BI">14.1.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ES1BI">14.1.1.1. Device IDs</h5><p class="docText">Each device file has a <span class="docEmphasis">major ID number</span> and a <span class="docEmphasis">minor ID number</span>.
 The major ID identifies the general class of device, and is used by the
 kernel to look up the appropriate driver for this type of device. The 
minor ID uniquely identifies a particular device within a general class.
 The major and minor IDs of a device file are displayed by the <span class="docEmphasis">ls -l</span> command.</p><p class="docText">A
 device’s major and minor IDs are recorded in the i-node for the device 
file. (We describe i-nodes in Section 14.4.) Each device driver 
registers its association with a specific major device ID, and this 
association provides the connection between the device special file and 
the device driver. The name of the device file has no relevance when the
 kernel looks for the device driver.</p><p class="docText">On
 Linux 2.4 and earlier, the total number of devices on the system is 
limited by the fact that device major and minor IDs are each represented
 using just 8 bits. The fact that major device IDs are fixed and 
centrally assigned (by the Linux Assigned Names and Numbers Authority; 
see http://www.lanana.org/)
 further exacerbates this limitation. Linux 2.6 eases this limitation by
 using more bits to hold the major and minor device IDs (respectively, 
12 and 20 bits).</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
