<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>14.2. Disks and Partitions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">14.2. Disks and Partitions</h3><p class="docText">Regular
 files and directories typically reside on hard disk devices. (Files and
 directories may also exist on other devices, such as CD-ROMs, flash 
memory cards, and virtual disks, but for the present discussion, we are 
interested primarily in hard disk devices.) In the following sections, 
we look at how disks are organized and divided into partitions.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4VBI">14.2.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EBWBI">14.2.1.1. Disk drives</h5><p class="docText">A
 hard disk drive is a mechanical device consisting of one or more 
platters that rotate at high speed (of the order of thousands of 
revolutions per minute). Magnetically encoded information on the disk 
surface is retrieved or modified by read/write heads that move radially 
across the disk. Physically, information on the disk surface is located 
on a set of concentric circles called <span class="docEmphasis">tracks</span>. Tracks themselves are divided into a number of <span class="docEmphasis">sectors</span>, each of which consists of a series of <span class="docEmphasis">physical</span>
 blocks. Physical blocks are typically 512 bytes (or some multiple 
thereof) in size, and represent the smallest unit of information that 
the drive can read or write.</p><p class="docText">Although
 modern disks are fast, reading and writing information on the disk 
still takes significant time. The disk head must first move to the 
appropriate track (seek time), then the drive must wait until the 
appropriate sector rotates under the head (rotational latency), and 
finally the required blocks must be transferred (transfer time). The 
total time required to carry out such an operation is typically of the 
order of milliseconds. By comparison, modern CPUs are capable of 
executing millions of instructions in this time.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ESWBI">14.2.1.2. Disk partitions</h5><p class="docText">Each disk is divided into one or more (nonoverlapping) <span class="docEmphasis">partitions</span>. Each partition is treated by the kernel as a separate device residing under the <tt>/dev</tt> directory.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The system administrator determines the number, type, and size of partitions on a disk using the <span class="docEmphasis">fdisk</span> command. The command <span class="docEmphasis">fdisk -l</span> lists all partitions on a disk. The Linux-specific <tt>/proc/partitions</tt> file lists the major and minor device numbers, size, and name of each disk partition on the system.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">A disk partition may hold any type of information, but usually contains one of the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">a <span class="docEmphasis">file system</span> holding regular files and directories, as described in Section 14.3;</p></li><li><p class="docList">a <span class="docEmphasis">data area</span> accessed as a raw-mode device, as described in Section 13.6 (some database management systems use this technique); or</p></li><li><p class="docList">a <span class="docEmphasis">swap area</span> used by the kernel for memory management.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">A swap area is created using the <span class="docEmphasis">mkswap(8)</span> command. A privileged (<tt>CAP_SYS_ADMIN</tt>) process can use the <span class="docEmphasis">swapon()</span> system call to notify the kernel that a disk partition is to be used as a swap area. The <span class="docEmphasis">swapoff()</span>
 system call performs the converse function, telling the kernel to cease
 using a disk partition as a swap area. These system calls are not 
standardized in SUSv3, but they exist on many UNIX implementations. See 
the <span class="docEmphasis">swapon(2)</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">swapon(8)</span> manual pages for additional information.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The Linux-specific <tt>/proc/swaps</tt>
 file can be used to display information about the currently enabled 
swap areas on the system. This information includes the size of each 
swap area and the amount of the area that is in use.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
