<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>14.6. Journaling File Systems</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">14.6. Journaling File Systems</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span>
 file system is a good example of a traditional UNIX file system, and 
suffers from a classic limitation of such file systems: after a system 
crash, a file-system consistency check (<span class="docEmphasis">fsck</span>)
 must be performed on reboot in order to ensure the integrity of the 
file system. This is necessary because, at the time of the system crash,
 a file update may have been only partially completed, and the 
file-system metadata (directory entries, i-node information, and file 
data block pointers) may be in an inconsistent state, so that the file 
system might be further damaged if these inconsistencies are not 
repaired. A file-system consistency check ensures the consistency of the
 file-system metadata. Where possible, repairs are performed; otherwise,
 information that is not retrievable (possibly including file data) is 
discarded.</p><p class="docText">The
 problem is that a consistency check requires examining the entire file 
system. On a small file system, this may take anything from several 
seconds to a few minutes. On a large file system, this may require 
several hours, which is a serious problem for systems that must maintain
 high availability (e.g., network servers).</p><p class="docText">Journaling
 file systems eliminate the need for lengthy file-system consistency 
checks after a system crash. A journaling file system logs (journals) 
all metadata updates to a special on-disk journal file before they are 
actually carried out. The updates are logged in groups of related 
metadata updates (<span class="docEmphasis">transactions</span>).
 In the event of a system crash in the middle of a transaction, on 
system reboot, the log can be used to rapidly redo any incomplete 
updates and bring the file system back to a consistent state. (To borrow
 database parlance, we can say that a journaling file system ensures 
that file metadata transactions are always <span class="docEmphasis">committed</span>
 as a complete unit.) Even very large journaling file systems can 
typically be available within seconds after a system crash, making them 
very attractive for systems with high-availability requirements.</p><p class="docText">The most notable disadvantage of journaling is that it adds time to file updates, though good design can make this overhead low.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Some
 journaling file systems ensure only the consistency of file metadata. 
Because they don’t log file data, data may still be lost in the event of
 a crash. The <span class="docEmphasis">ext3</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ext4</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">Reiserfs</span>
 file systems provide options for logging data updates, but, depending 
on the workload, this may result in lower file I/O performance.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The journaling file systems available for Linux include the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Reiserfs</span> was the first of the journaling file systems to be integrated into the kernel (in version 2.4.1). <span class="docEmphasis">Reiserfs</span> provides a feature called <span class="docEmphasis">tail packing</span> (or <span class="docEmphasis">tail merging</span>):
 small files (and the final fragment of larger files) are packed into 
the same disk blocks as the file metadata. Because many systems have 
(and some applications create) large numbers of small files, this can 
save a significant amount of disk space.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">ext3</span> file system was a result of a project to add journaling to <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span> with minimal impact. The migration path from <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span> to <span class="docEmphasis">ext3</span> is very easy (no backup and restore are required), and it is possible to migrate in the reverse direction as well. The <span class="docEmphasis">ext3</span> file system was integrated into the kernel in version 2.4.15.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">JFS</span> was developed at IBM. It was integrated into the 2.4.20 kernel.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">XFS</span> (http://oss.sgi.com/projects/xfs/) was originally developed by Silicon Graphics (SGI) in the early 1990s for Irix, its proprietary UNIX implementation. In 2001, <span class="docEmphasis">XFS</span> was ported to Linux and made available as a free software project. <span class="docEmphasis">XFS</span> was integrated into the 2.4.24 kernel.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Support for the various file systems is enabled using kernel options that are set under the <span class="docEmphasis">File systems</span> menu when configuring the kernel.</p><p class="docText">At
 the time of writing, work is in progress on two other file systems that
 provide journaling and a range of other advanced features:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">ext4</span> file system (http://ext4.wiki.kernel.org/) is the successor to <span class="docEmphasis">ext3</span>.
 The first pieces of the implementation were added in kernel 2.6.19, and
 various features were added in later kernel versions. Among the planned
 (or already implemented) features for <span class="docEmphasis">ext4</span>
 are extents (reservation of contiguous blocks of storage) and other 
allocation features that aim to reduce file fragmentation, online 
file-system defragmentation, faster file-system checking, and support 
for nanosecond timestamps.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Btrfs</span> (B-tree FS, usually pronounced “butter FS”; http://btrfs.wiki.kernel.org/)
 is a new file system designed from the ground up to provide a range of 
modern features, including extents, writable snapshots (which provide 
functionality equivalent to metadata and data journaling), checksums on 
data and metadata, online file-system checking, online file-system 
defragmentation, space-efficient packing of small files, and 
space-efficient indexed directories. It was integrated into the kernel 
in version 2.6.29.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
