<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>14.8. Mounting and Unmounting File Systems</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">14.8. Mounting and Unmounting File Systems</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mount()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">umount()</span> system calls allow a privileged (<tt>CAP_SYS_ADMIN</tt>)
 process to mount and unmount file systems. Most UNIX implementations 
provide versions of these system calls. However, they are not 
standardized by SUSv3, and their operation varies both across UNIX 
implementations and across file systems.</p><p class="docText">Before
 looking at these system calls, it is useful to know about three files 
that contain information about the file systems that are currently 
mounted or can be mounted:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">A list of the currently mounted file systems can be read from the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/mounts</tt> virtual file. <tt>/proc/mounts</tt> is an interface to kernel data structures, so it always contains accurate information about mounted file systems.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">With the arrival of the per-process mount namespace feature mentioned earlier, each process now has a <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/mounts</tt> file that lists the mount points constituting its mount namespace, and <tt>/proc/mounts</tt> is just a symbolic link to /<tt>proc/self/mounts</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">mount(8)</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">umount(8)</span> commands automatically maintain the file <tt>/etc/mtab</tt>, which contains information that is similar to that in <tt>/proc/mounts</tt>, but slightly more detailed. In particular, <tt>/etc/mtab</tt> includes file system–specific options given to <span class="docEmphasis">mount(8)</span>, which are not shown in <tt>/proc/mounts</tt>. However, because the <span class="docEmphasis">mount()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">umount()</span> system calls don’t update <tt>/etc/mtab</tt>, this file may be inaccurate if some application that mounts or unmounts devices fails to update it.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>/etc/fstab</tt>
 file, maintained manually by the system administrator, contains 
descriptions of all of the available file systems on a system, and is 
used by the <span class="docEmphasis">mount(8)</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">umount(8)</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">fsck(8)</span> commands.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The <tt>/proc/mounts</tt>, <tt>/etc/mtab</tt>, and <tt>/etc/fstab</tt> files share a common format, described in the <span class="docEmphasis">fstab(5)</span> manual page. Here is an example of a line from the <tt>/proc/mounts</tt> file:</p><pre>/dev/sda9 /boot ext3 rw 0 0</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This line contains six fields:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The name of the mounted device.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The mount point for the device.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The file-system type.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Mount flags. In the above example, <span class="docEmphasis">rw</span> indicates that the file system was mounted read-write.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A number used to control the operation of file-system backups by <span class="docEmphasis">dump(8)</span>. This field and the next are used only in the <tt>/etc/fstab</tt> file; for <tt>/proc/mounts</tt> and /<tt>etc/mtab</tt>, these fields are always 0.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A number used to control the order in which <span class="docEmphasis">fsck(8)</span> checks file systems at system boot time.</p></div></li></ol></div><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getfsent(3)</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getmntent(3)</span> manual pages document functions that can be used to read records from these files.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETBCI">14.8.1. Mounting a File System: <span class="docEmphasis">mount()</span></h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mount()</span> system call mounts the file system contained on the device specified by <span class="docEmphasis">source</span> under the directory (the <span class="docEmphasis">mount point</span>) specified by <span class="docEmphasis">target</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/mount.h&gt;

int <b>mount</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">source</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">target</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">fstype</span>,
          unsigned long <span class="docEmphasis">mountflags</span>, const void *<span class="docEmphasis">data</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The names <span class="docEmphasis">source</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">target</span> are used for the first two arguments because <span class="docEmphasis">mount()</span> can perform other tasks than mounting a disk file system under a directory.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">fstype</span> argument is a string identifying the type of file system contained on the device, such as <span class="docEmphasis">ext4</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">btrfs</span>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mountflags</span> argument is a bit mask constructed by ORing (<tt>|</tt>) zero or more of the flags shown in Table 14-1, which are described in more detail below.</p><p class="docText">The final <span class="docEmphasis">mount()</span> argument, <span class="docEmphasis">data</span>,
 is a pointer to a buffer of information whose interpretation depends on
 the file system. For most file-system types, this argument is a string 
consisting of comma-separated option settings. A full list of these 
options can be found in the <span class="docEmphasis">mount(8)</span> manual page (or the documentation for the file system concerned, if it is not described in <span class="docEmphasis">mount(8)</span>).</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 14-1. mountflags <tt>values for</tt> mount()</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Flag</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Purpose</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MS_BIND</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Create a bind mount (since Linux 2.4)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MS_DIRSYNC</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Make directory updates synchronous (since Linux 2.6)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MS_MANDLOCK</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Permit mandatory locking of files</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MS_MOVE</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Atomically move mount point to new location</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MS_NOATIME</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Don’t update last access time for files</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MS_NODEV</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Don’t allow access to devices</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MS_NODIRATIME</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Don’t update last access time for directories</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MS_NOEXEC</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Don’t allow programs to be executed</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MS_NOSUID</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Disable set-user-ID and set-group-ID programs</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MS_RDONLY</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Read-only mount; files can’t be created or modified</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MS_REC</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Recursive mount (since Linux 2.6.20)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MS_RELATIME</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Update last access time only if older than last modification time or last status change time (since Linux 2.4.11)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MS_REMOUNT</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Remount with new <span class="docEmphasis">mountflags</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">data</span></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MS_STRICTATIME</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Always update last access time (since Linux 2.6.30)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MS_SYNCHRONOUS</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Make all file and directory updates synchronous</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mountflags</span> argument is a bit mask of flags that modify the operation of <span class="docEmphasis">mount()</span>. Zero or more of the following flags can be specified in <span class="docEmphasis">mountflags</span>:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MS_BIND</span></span> (since Linux 2.4)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Create a bind mount. We describe this feature in Section 14.9.4. If this flag is specified, then the <span class="docEmphasis">fstype</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">mountflags</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">data</span> arguments are ignored.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MS_DIRSYNC</span></span> (since Linux 2.6)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Make directory updates synchronous. This is similar to the effect of the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> <tt>O_SYNC</tt> flag (Section 13.3), but applies only to directory updates. The <tt>MS_SYNCHRONOUS</tt> flag described below provides a superset of the functionality of <tt>MS_DIRSYNC</tt>, ensuring that both file and directory updates are performed synchronously. The <tt>MS_DIRSYNC</tt> flag allows an application to ensure that directory updates (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">open(pathname, O_CREAT)</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">rename()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">link()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">unlink()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">symlink()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">mkdir()</span>) are synchronized without incurring the expense of synchronizing all file updates. The <tt>FS_DIRSYNC_FL</tt> flag (Section 15.5) serves a similar purpose to <tt>MS_DIRSYNC</tt>, with the difference that <tt>FS_DIRSYNC_FL</tt> can be applied to individual directories. In addition, on Linux, calling <span class="docEmphasis">fsync()</span>
 on a file descriptor that refers to a directory provides a means of 
synchronizing directory updates on a per-directory basis. (This 
Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">fsync()</span> behavior is not specified in SUSv3.)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MS_MANDLOCK</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Permit mandatory record locking on files in this file system. We describe record locking in Chapter 55.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MS_MOVE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Atomically move the existing mount point specified by <span class="docEmphasis">source</span> to the new location specified by <span class="docEmphasis">target</span>. This corresponds to the <span class="docEmphasis">—move</span> option to <span class="docEmphasis">mount(8)</span>.
 This is equivalent to unmounting the subtree and then remounting at a 
different location, except that there is no point in time when the 
subtree is unmounted. The <span class="docEmphasis">source</span> argument should be a string specified as a <span class="docEmphasis">target</span> in a previous <span class="docEmphasis">mount()</span> call. When this flag is specified, the <span class="docEmphasis">fstype</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">mountflags</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">data</span> arguments are ignored.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MS_NOATIME</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Don’t update the last access time for files in this file system. The purpose of this flag, as well as the <tt>MS_NODIRATIME</tt>
 flag described below, is to eliminate the extra disk access required to
 update the file i-node each time a file is accessed. In some 
applications, maintaining this timestamp is not critical, and avoiding 
doing so can significantly improve performance. The <tt>MS_NOATIME</tt> flag serves a similar purpose to the <tt>FS_NOATIME_FL</tt> flag (Section 15.5), with the difference that <tt>FS_NOATIME_FL</tt> can be applied to single files. Linux also provides similar functionality via the <tt>O_NOATIME</tt> <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> flag, which selects this behavior for individual open files (Section 4.3.1).</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MS_NODEV</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Don’t
 allow access to block and character devices on this file system. This 
is a security feature designed to prevent users from doing things such 
as inserting a removable disk containing device special files that would
 allow arbitrary access to the system.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MS_NODIRATIME</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Don’t update the last access time for directories on this file system. (This flag provides a subset of the functionality of <tt>MS_NOATIME</tt>, which prevents updates to the last access time for all file types.)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MS_NOEXEC</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Don’t
 allow programs (or scripts) to be executed from this file system. This 
is useful if the file system contains non-Linux executables.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MS_NOSUID</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Disable
 set-user-ID and set-group-ID programs on this file system. This is a 
security feature to prevent users from running set-user-ID and 
set-group-ID programs from removable devices.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MS_RDONLY</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Mount the file system read-only, so that no new files can be created and no existing files can be modified.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MS_REC</span></span> (since Linux 2.4.11)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This flag is used in conjunction with other flags (e.g., <tt>MS_BIND</tt>) to recursively apply the mount action to all of the mounts in a subtree.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MS_RELATIME</span></span> (since Linux 2.6.20)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Update
 the last access timestamp for files on this file system only if the 
current setting of this timestamp is less than or equal to either the 
last modification or the last status change timestamp. This provides 
some of the performance benefits of <tt>MS_NOATIME</tt>,
 but is useful for programs that need to know if a file has been read 
since it was last updated. Since Linux 2.6.30, the behavior provided by <tt>MS_RELATIME</tt> is the default (unless the <tt>MS_NOATIME</tt> flag is specified), and the <tt>MS_STRICTATIME</tt>
 flag is required to obtain classical behavior. In addition, since Linux
 2.6.30, the last access timestamp is always updated if its current 
value is more than 24 hours in the past, even if the current value is 
more recent than the last modification and last status change 
timestamps. (This is useful for certain system programs that monitor 
directories to see whether files have recently been accessed.)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MS_REMOUNT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Alter the <span class="docEmphasis">mountflags</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">data</span> for a file system that is already mounted (e.g., to make a read-only file system writable). When using this flag, the <span class="docEmphasis">source</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">target</span> arguments should be the same as for the original <span class="docEmphasis">mount()</span> call, and the <span class="docEmphasis">fstype</span>
 argument is ignored. This flag avoids the need to unmount and remount 
the disk, which may not be possible in some cases. For example, we can’t
 unmount a file system if any process has files open on, or its current 
working directory located within, the file system (this will always be 
true of the root file system). Another example of where we need to use <tt>MS_REMOUNT</tt> is with <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfs</span> (memory-based) file systems (Section 14.10), which can’t be unmounted without losing their contents. Not all <span class="docEmphasis">mountflags</span> are modifiable; see the <span class="docEmphasis">mount(2)</span> manual page for details.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MS_STRICTATIME</span></span> (since Linux 2.6.30)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Always
 update the last access timestamp when files on this file system are 
accessed. This was the default behavior before Linux 2.6.30. If <tt>MS_STRICTATIME</tt> is specified, then <tt>MS_NOATIME</tt> and <tt>MS_RELATIME</tt> are ignored if they are also specified in <span class="docEmphasis">mountflags</span>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MS_SYNCHRONOUS</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Make
 all file and directory updates on this file system synchronous. (In the
 case of files, this is as though files were always opened with the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> <tt>O_SYNC</tt> flag.)</p></dd></dl><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Starting with kernel 2.6.15, Linux provides four new mount flags to support the notion of <span class="docEmphasis">shared subtrees</span>. The new flags are <tt>MS_PRIVATE</tt>, <tt>MS_SHARED</tt>, <tt>MS_SLAVE</tt>, and <tt>MS_UNBINDABLE</tt>. (These flags can be used in conjunction with <tt>MS_REC</tt>
 to propagate their effects to all of the submounts under a mount 
subtree.) Shared subtrees are designed for use with certain advanced 
file-system features, such as per-process mount namespaces (see the 
description of <tt>CLONE_NEWNS</tt> in Section 28.2.1), and the <span class="docEmphasis">Filesystem in Userspace</span>
 (FUSE) facility. The shared subtree facility permits file-system mounts
 to be propagated between mount namespaces in a controlled fashion. 
Details on shared subtrees can be found in the kernel source code file <tt>Documentation/filesystems/sharedsubtree.txt</tt> and [Viro &amp; Pai, 2006].</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EY4CI">14.8.1.1. Example program</h5><p class="docText">The program in Example 14-1 provides a command-level interface to the <span class="docEmphasis">mount(2)</span> system call. In effect, it is a crude version of the <span class="docEmphasis">mount(8)</span>
 command. The following shell session log demonstrates the use of this 
program. We begin by creating a directory to be used as a mount point 
and mounting a file system:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>su </b>                                    <i> Need privilege to mount a file system</i>
Password:
# <b>mkdir /testfs </b>
# <b>./t_mount -t ext2 -o bsdgroups /dev/sda12 /testfs </b>
# <b>cat /proc/mounts | grep sda12 </b>         <i> Verify the setup</i>
/dev/sda12 /testfs ext3 rw 0 0          <i> Doesn't show bsdgroups</i>
# <b>grep sda12 /etc/mtab </b>

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We find that the preceding <span class="docEmphasis">grep</span> command produces no output because our program doesn’t update <tt>/etc/mtab</tt>. We continue, remounting the file system read-only:</p><pre># <b>./t_mount -f Rr /dev/sda12 /testfs </b>
# <b>cat /proc/mounts | grep sda12 </b>         <i> Verify change</i>
/dev/sda12 /testfs ext3 ro 0 0</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The string <span class="docEmphasis">ro</span> in the line displayed from <tt>/proc/mounts</tt> indicates that this is a read-only mount.</p><p class="docText">Finally, we move the mount point to a new location within the directory hierarchy:</p><pre># <b>mkdir /demo </b>
# <b>./t_mount -f m /testfs /demo </b>
# <b>cat /proc/mounts | grep sda12 </b>         <i> Verify change</i>
/dev/sda12 /demo ext3 ro 0</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EEDDI">Example 14-1. Using <span class="docEmphasis">mount()</span></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>filesys/t_mount.c</b>
#include &lt;sys/mount.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

static void
usageError(const char *progName, const char *msg)
{
    if (msg != NULL)
        fprintf(stderr, "%s", msg);

    fprintf(stderr, "Usage: %s [options] source target\n\n", progName);
    fprintf(stderr, "Available options:\n");
#define fpe(str) fprintf(stderr, "    " str)    /* Shorter! */
    fpe("-t fstype        [e.g., 'ext2' or 'reiserfs']\n");
    fpe("-o data          [file system-dependent options,\n");
    fpe("                 e.g., 'bsdgroups' for ext2]\n");
    fpe("-f mountflags    can include any of:\n");
#define fpe2(str) fprintf(stderr, "            " str)
    fpe2("b - MS_BIND         create a bind mount\n");
    fpe2("d - MS_DIRSYNC      synchronous directory updates\n");
    fpe2("l - MS_MANDLOCK     permit mandatory locking\n");
    fpe2("m - MS_MOVE         atomically move subtree\n");
    fpe2("A - MS_NOATIME      don't update atime (last access time)\n");
    fpe2("V - MS_NODEV        don't permit device access\n");
    fpe2("D - MS_NODIRATIME   don't update atime on directories\n");
    fpe2("E - MS_NOEXEC       don't allow executables\n");
    fpe2("S - MS_NOSUID       disable set-user/group-ID programs\n");
    fpe2("r - MS_RDONLY       read-only mount\n");
    fpe2("c - MS_REC          recursive mount\n");
    fpe2("R - MS_REMOUNT      remount\n");
    fpe2("s - MS_SYNCHRONOUS  make writes synchronous\n");
    exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    unsigned long flags;
    char *data, *fstype;
    int j, opt;

    flags = 0;
    data = NULL;
    fstype = NULL;

    while ((opt = getopt(argc, argv, "o:t:f:")) != -1) {
        switch (opt) {
        case 'o':
            data = optarg;
            break;

        case 't':
            fstype = optarg;
            break;

        case 'f':
            for (j = 0; j &lt; strlen(optarg); j++) {
                switch (optarg[j]) {
                case 'b': flags |= MS_BIND;             break;
                case 'd': flags |= MS_DIRSYNC;          break;
                case 'l': flags |= MS_MANDLOCK;         break;
                case 'm': flags |= MS_MOVE;             break;
                case 'A': flags |= MS_NOATIME;          break;
                case 'V': flags |= MS_NODEV;            break;
                case 'D': flags |= MS_NODIRATIME;       break;
                case 'E': flags |= MS_NOEXEC;           break;
                case 'S': flags |= MS_NOSUID;           break;
                case 'r': flags |= MS_RDONLY;           break;
                case 'c': flags |= MS_REC;              break;
                case 'R': flags |= MS_REMOUNT;          break;
                case 's': flags |= MS_SYNCHRONOUS;      break;
                default:  usageError(argv[0], NULL);
                }
            }
            break;

        default:
            usageError(argv[0], NULL);
        }
    }

    if (argc != optind + 2)
        usageError(argv[0], "Wrong number of arguments\n");

    if (mount(argv[optind], argv[optind + 1], fstype, flags, data) == -1)
        errExit("mount");

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
      <b>filesys/t_mount.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERDDI">14.8.2. Unmounting a File System: <span class="docEmphasis">umount()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">umount2()</span></h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">umount()</span> system call unmounts a mounted file system.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/mount.h&gt;

int <b>umount</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">target</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">target</span> argument specifies the mount point of the file system to be unmounted.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On
 Linux 2.2 and earlier, the file system can be identified in two ways: 
by the mount point or by the name of the device containing the file 
system. Since kernel 2.4, Linux doesn’t allow the latter possibility, 
because a single file system can now be mounted at multiple locations, 
so that specifying a file system for <span class="docEmphasis">target</span> would be ambiguous. We explain this point in further detail in Section 14.9.1.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">It is not possible to unmount a file system that is <span class="docEmphasis">busy</span>;
 that is, if there are open files on the file system, or a process’s 
current working directory is somewhere in the file system. Calling <span class="docEmphasis">umount()</span> on a busy file system yields the error <tt>EBUSY</tt>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">umount2()</span> system call is an extended version of <span class="docEmphasis">umount()</span>. It allows finer control over the unmount operation via the <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> argument.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/mount.h&gt;

int <b>umount2</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">target</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">This <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> bit-mask argument consists of zero or more of the following values ORed together:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MNT_DETACH</span></span> (since Linux 2.4.11)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Perform a <span class="docEmphasis">lazy</span>
 unmount. The mount point is marked so that no process can make new 
accesses to it, but processes that are already using it can continue to 
do so. The file system is actually unmounted when all processes cease 
using the mount.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MNT_EXPIRE</span></span> (since Linux 2.6.8)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Mark the mount point as <span class="docEmphasis">expired</span>. If an initial <span class="docEmphasis">umount2()</span> call is made specifying this flag, and the mount point is not busy, then the call fails with the error <tt>EAGAIN</tt>, but the mount point is marked to expire. (If the mount point is busy, then the call fails with the error <tt>EBUSY</tt>,
 and the mount point is not marked to expire.) A mount point remains 
expired as long as no process subsequently makes use of it. A second <span class="docEmphasis">umount2()</span> call specifying <tt>MNT_EXPIRE</tt>
 will unmount an expired mount point. This provides a mechanism to 
unmount a file system that hasn’t been used for some period of time. 
This flag can’t be specified with <tt>MNT_DETACH</tt> or <tt>MNT_FORCE</tt>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MNT_FORCE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Force an unmount even if the device is busy (NFS mounts only). Employing this option can cause data loss.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">UMOUNT_NOFOLLOW</span></span> (since Linux 2.6.34)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Don’t dereference <span class="docEmphasis">target</span> if it is a symbolic link. This flag is designed for use in certain set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span> programs that allow unprivileged users to perform unmounts, in order to avoid the security problems that could occur if <span class="docEmphasis">target</span> is a symbolic link that is changed to point to a different location.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
</body>
</html>
