<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>14.9. Advanced Mount Features</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">14.9. Advanced Mount Features</h3><p class="docText">We
 now look at a number of more advanced features that can be employed 
when mounting file systems. We demonstrate the use of most of these 
features using the <span class="docEmphasis">mount(8)</span> command. The same effects can also be accomplished from a program via calls to <span class="docEmphasis">mount(2)</span>.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EO6BI">14.9.1. Mounting a File System at Multiple Mount Points</h4><p class="docText">In
 kernel versions before 2.4, a file system could be mounted only on a 
single mount point. From kernel 2.4 onward, a file system can be mounted
 at multiple locations within the file system. Because each of the mount
 points shows the same subtree, changes made via one mount point are 
visible through the other(s), as demonstrated by the following shell 
session:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>su </b>                                  <i> Privilege is required to use mount(8)</i>
Password:
# <b>mkdir /testfs </b>                       <i> Create two directories for mount points</i>
# <b>mkdir /demo </b>
# <b>mount /dev/sda12 /testfs </b>            <i> Mount file system at one mount point</i>
# <b>mount /dev/sda12 /demo </b>              <i> Mount file system at second mount point</i>
# <b>mount | grep sda12 </b>                  <i> Verify the setup</i>
/dev/sda12 on /testfs type ext3 (rw)
/dev/sda12 on /demo type ext3 (rw)
# <b>touch /testfs/myfile </b>                <i> Make a change via first mount point</i>
# <b>ls /demo </b>                            <i> View files at second mount point</i>
lost+found  myfile

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The output of the <span class="docEmphasis">ls</span> command shows that the change made via the first mount point (<tt>/testfs</tt>) was visible via the second mount point (<tt>/demo</tt>).</p><p class="docText">We present one example of why it is useful to mount a file system at multiple points when we describe bind mounts in Section 14.9.4.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">It is because a device can be mounted at multiple points that the <span class="docEmphasis">umount()</span> system call can’t take a device as its argument in Linux 2.4 and later.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EACCI">14.9.2. Stacking Multiple Mounts on the Same Mount Point</h4><p class="docText">In
 kernel versions before 2.4, a mount point could be used only once. 
Since kernel 2.4, Linux allows multiple mounts to be stacked on a single
 mount point. Each new mount hides the directory subtree previously 
visible at that mount point. When the mount at the top of the stack is 
unmounted, the previously hidden mount becomes visible once more, as 
demonstrated by the following shell session:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>su </b>                                  <i> Privilege is required to use mount(8)</i>
Password:
# <b>mount /dev/sda12 /testfs </b>            <i> Create first mount on</i> /testfs
# <b>touch /testfs/myfile </b>                <i> Make a file in this subtree</i>
# <b>mount /dev/sda13 /testfs </b>            <i> Stack a second mount on</i> /testfs
# <b>mount | grep testfs </b>                 <i> Verify the setup</i>
/dev/sda12 on /testfs type ext3 (rw)
/dev/sda13 on /testfs type reiserfs (rw)
# <b>touch /testfs/newfile </b>               <i> Create a file in this subtree</i>
# <b>ls /testfs </b>                          <i> View files in this subtree</i>
newfile
# <b>umount /testfs </b>                      <i> Pop a mount from the stack</i>
# <b>mount | grep testfs </b>
/dev/sda12 on /testfs type ext3 (rw)
  <i> Now only one mount on</i> /testfs
# <b>ls /testfs </b>                          <i> Previous mount is now visible</i>
lost+found  myfile

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">One use of mount stacking is 
to stack a new mount on an existing mount point that is busy. Processes 
that hold file descriptors open, that are <span class="docEmphasis">chroot()</span>-jailed,
 or that have current working directories within the old mount point 
continue to operate under that mount, but processes making new accesses 
to the mount point use the new mount. Combined with a <tt>MNT_DETACH</tt>
 unmount, this can provide a smooth migration off a file system without 
needing to take the system into single-user mode. We’ll see another 
example of how stacking mounts is useful when we discuss the <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfs</span> file system in Section 14.10.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJECI">14.9.3. Mount Flags That Are Per-Mount Options</h4><p class="docText">In
 kernel versions before 2.4, there was a one-to-one correspondence 
between file systems and mount points. Because this no longer holds in 
Linux 2.4 and later, some of the <span class="docEmphasis">mountflags</span> values described in Section 14.8.1 can be set on a per-mount basis. These flags are <tt>MS_NOATIME</tt> (since Linux 2.6.16), <tt>MS_NODEV</tt>, <tt>MS_NODIRATIME</tt> (since Linux 2.6.16), <tt>MS_NOEXEC</tt>, <tt>MS_NOSUID</tt>, <tt>MS_RDONLY</tt> (since Linux 2.6.26), and <tt>MS_RELATIME</tt>. The following shell session demonstrates this effect for the <tt>MS_NOEXEC</tt> flag:</p><pre>$ <b>su</b>
Password:
# <b>mount /dev/sda12 /testfs</b>
# <b>mount -o noexec /dev/sda12 /demo</b>
# <b>cat /proc/mounts | grep sda12</b>
/dev/sda12 /testfs ext3 rw 0 0
/dev/sda12 /demo ext3 rw,noexec 0 0
# <b>cp /bin/echo /testfs</b>
# <b>/testfs/echo "Art is something which is well done"</b>
Art is something which is well done
# <b>/demo/echo "Art is something which is well done"</b>
bash: /demo/echo: Permission denied</pre><br/>
<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGICI">14.9.4. Bind Mounts</h4><p class="docText">Starting with kernel 2.4, Linux permits the creation of bind mounts. A <span class="docEmphasis">bind mount</span> (created using the <span class="docEmphasis">mount()</span> <tt>MS_BIND</tt>
 flag) allows a directory or a file to be mounted at some other location
 in the file-system hierarchy. This results in the directory or file 
being visible in both locations. A bind mount is somewhat like a hard 
link, but differs in two respects:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">A bind mount can cross file-system mount points (and even <span class="docEmphasis">chroot</span> jails).</p></li><li><p class="docList">It is possible to make a bind mount for a directory.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">We can create a bind mount from the shell using the <span class="docEmphasis">—bind</span> option to <span class="docEmphasis">mount(8)</span>, as shown in the following examples.</p><p class="docText">In
 the first example, we bind mount a directory at another location and 
show that files created in one directory are visible at the other 
location:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>su </b>                            <i> Privilege is required to use mount(8)</i>
Password:
# <b>pwd </b>
/testfs
# <b>mkdir d1 </b>                      <i> Create directory to be bound at another location</i>
# <b>touch d1/x </b>                    <i> Create file in the directory</i>
# <b>mkdir d2 </b>                      <i> Create mount point to which</i> d1 <i> will be bound</i>
# <b>mount --bind d1 d2 </b>            <i> Create bind mount:</i> d1 <i> visible via</i> d2
# <b>ls d2 </b>                         <i> Verify that we can see contents of</i> d1 <i> via</i> d2
x
# <b>touch d2/y </b>                    <i> Create second file in directory</i> d2
# <b>ls d1 </b>                         <i> Verify that this change is visible via</i> d1
x  y

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><a name="second example"></a>In the second example, 
we bind mount a file at another location and demonstrate that changes to
 the file via one mount are visible via the other mount:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth"># <b>cat &gt; f1 </b>                      <i> Create file to be bound to another location</i>
<b>Chance is always powerful. Let your hook be always cast. </b>
<i> Type Control-D</i>
# <b>touch f2 </b>                      <i> This is the new mount point</i>
# <b>mount --bind f1 f2 </b>            <i> Bind</i> f1 <i> as</i> f2
# <b>mount | egrep '(d1|f1)' </b>       <i> See how mount points look</i>
/testfs/d1 on /testfs/d2 type none (rw,bind)
/testfs/f1 on /testfs/f2 type none (rw,bind)
# <b>cat &gt;&gt; f2 </b>                     <i> Change</i> f2
<b>In the pool where you least expect it, will be a fish. </b>
# <b>cat f1 </b>                        <i> The change is visible via original file</i> f1
Chance is always powerful. Let your hook be always cast.
In the pool where you least expect it, will be a fish.
# <b>rm f2 </b>                         <i> Can't do this because it is a mount point</i>
rm: cannot unlink `f2': Device or resource busy
# <b>umount f2 </b>                     <i> So unmount</i>
# <b>rm f2 </b>                         <i> Now we can remove</i> f2

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">One example of when we might use a bind mount is in the creation of a <span class="docEmphasis">chroot</span> jail (Section 18.12). Rather than replicating various standard directories (such as <tt>/lib</tt>) in the jail, we can simply create bind mounts for these directories (possibly mounted read-only) within the jail.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJNCI">14.9.5. Recursive Bind Mounts</h4><p class="docText">By default, if we create a bind mount for a directory using <tt>MS_BIND</tt>,
 then only that directory is mounted at the new location; if there are 
any submounts under the source directory, they are not replicated under 
the mount <span class="docEmphasis">target</span>. Linux 2.4.11 added the <tt>MS_REC</tt> flag, which can be ORed with <tt>MS_BIND</tt> as part of the <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> argument to <span class="docEmphasis">mount()</span> so that submounts <span class="docEmphasis">are</span> replicated under the mount target. This is referred to as a <span class="docEmphasis">recursive bind mount</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">mount(8)</span> command provides the <span class="docEmphasis">—rbind</span> option to achieve the same effect from the shell, as shown in the following shell session.</p><p class="docText">We begin by creating a directory tree (<tt>src1</tt>) mounted under <tt>top</tt>. This tree includes a submount (<tt>src2</tt>) at <tt>top/sub</tt>.</p><pre>$ <b>su </b>
Password:
# <b>mkdir top </b>                     <i> This is our top-level mount point</i>
# <b>mkdir src1 </b>                    <i> We'll mount this under</i> top
# <b>touch src1/aaa </b>
# <b>mount --bind src1 top </b>         <i> Create a normal bind mount</i>
# <b>mkdir top/sub </b>                 <i> Create directory for a submount under</i> top
# <b>mkdir src2 </b>                    <i> We'll mount this under</i> top/sub
# <b>touch src2/bbb </b>
# <b>mount --bind src2 top/sub </b>     <i> Create a normal bind mount</i>
# <b>find top </b>                      <i> Verify contents under</i> top <i> mount tree</i>
top
top/aaa
top/sub                         <i> This is the submount</i>
top/sub/bbb</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Now we create another bind mount (<tt>dir1</tt>) using <tt>top</tt> as the source. Since this new mount is nonrecursive, the submount is not replicated.</p><pre># <b>mkdir dir1 </b>
# <b>mount --bind top dir1 </b>         <i> Here we use a normal bind mount</i>
# <b>find dir1 </b>
dir1
dir1/aaa
dir1/sub</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The absence of <tt>dir1/sub/bbb</tt> in the output of <span class="docEmphasis">find</span> shows that the submount <tt>top/sub</tt> was not replicated.</p><p class="docText">Now we create a recursive bind mount (<tt>dir2</tt>) using <tt>top</tt> as the source.</p><pre># <b>mkdir dir2</b>
# <b>mount --rbind top dir2</b>
# <b>find dir2</b>
dir2
dir2/aaa
dir2/sub
dir2/sub/bbb</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The presence of <tt>dir2/sub/bbb</tt> in the output of <span class="docEmphasis">find</span> shows that the submount <tt>top/sub</tt> was replicated.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
