<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>14.10. A Virtual Memory File System: tmpfs</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">14.10. A Virtual Memory File System: <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfs</span></h3><p class="docText">All of the file systems we have described so far in this chapter reside on disks. However, Linux also supports the notion of <span class="docEmphasis">virtual file systems</span> that reside in memory. To applications, these look just like any other file system—the same operations (<span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">link()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">mkdir()</span>,
 and so on) can be applied to files and directories in such file 
systems. There is, however, one important difference: file operations 
are much faster, since no disk access is involved.</p><p class="docText">Various memory-based file systems have been developed for Linux. The most sophisticated of these to date is the <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfs</span> file system, which first appeared in Linux 2.4. The <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfs</span> file system differs from other memory-based file systems in that it is a <span class="docEmphasis">virtual</span> memory file system. This means that <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfs</span> uses not only RAM, but also the swap space, if RAM is exhausted. (Although the <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfs</span> file system described here is Linux-specific, most UNIX implementations provide some form of memory-based file system.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfs</span> file system is an optional Linux kernel component that is configured via the <tt>CONFIG_TMPFS</tt> option.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">To create a <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfs</span> file system, we use a command of the following form:</p><pre># <b>mount -t tmpfs</b> <b><tt><i>source target</i></tt></b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">source</span> can be any name; its only significance is that it appears in <tt>/proc/mounts</tt> and is displayed by the <span class="docEmphasis">mount</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">df</span> commands. As usual, <span class="docEmphasis">target</span> is the mount point for the file system. Note that it is not necessary to use <span class="docEmphasis">mkfs</span> to create a file system first, because the kernel automatically builds a file system as part of the <span class="docEmphasis">mount()</span> system call.</p><p class="docText">As an example of the use of <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfs</span>, we could employ mount stacking (so that we don’t need to care if <tt>/tmp</tt> is already in use) and create a <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfs</span> file system mounted on <tt>/tmp</tt> as follows:</p><pre># <b>mount -t tmpfs newtmp /tmp</b>
# <b>cat /proc/mounts | grep tmp</b>
newtmp /tmp tmpfs rw 0 0</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">A command such as the above (or an equivalent entry in <tt>/etc/fstab</tt>) is sometimes used to improve the performance of applications (e.g., compilers) that make heavy use of the <tt>/tmp</tt> directory for creating temporary files.</p><p class="docText">By default, a <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfs</span> file system is permitted to grow to half the size of RAM, but the <span class="docEmphasis">size=nbytes mount</span>
 option can be used to set a different ceiling for the file-system size,
 either when the file system is created or during a later remount. (A <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfs</span> file system consumes only as much memory and swap space as is currently required for the files it holds.)</p><p class="docText">If we unmount a <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfs</span> file system, or the system crashes, then all data in the file system is lost; hence the name <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfs</span>.</p><p class="docText">Aside from use by user applications, <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfs</span> file systems also serve two special purposes:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">An invisible <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfs</span> file system, mounted internally by the kernel, is used for implementing System V shared memory (Chapter 48) and shared anonymous memory mappings (Chapter 49).</p></li><li><p class="docList">A <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfs</span> file system mounted at <tt>/dev/shm</tt> is used for the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> implementation of POSIX shared memory and POSIX semaphores.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
