<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>14.11. Obtaining Information About a File System: statvfs()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">14.11. Obtaining Information About a File System: <span class="docEmphasis">statvfs()</span></h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">statvfs()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fstatvfs()</span> library functions obtain information about a mounted file system.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/statvfs.h&gt;

int <b>statvfs</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, struct statvfs *<span class="docEmphasis">statvfsbuf</span>);
int <b>fstatvfs</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, struct statvfs *<span class="docEmphasis">statvfsbuf</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Both return 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The only difference between these two functions is in how the file system is identified. For <span class="docEmphasis">statvfs()</span>, we use <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> to specify the name of any file in the file system. For <span class="docEmphasis">fstatvfs()</span>, we specify an open file descriptor, <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, referring to any file in the file system. Both functions return a <span class="docEmphasis">statvfs</span> structure containing information about the file system in the buffer pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">statvfsbuf</span>. This structure has the following form:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">struct statvfs {
    unsigned long f_bsize;     /* File-system block size (in bytes) */
    unsigned long f_frsize;    /* Fundamental file-system block size
                                  (in bytes) */
    fsblkcnt_t    f_blocks;    /* Total number of blocks in file
                                  system (in units of 'f_frsize') */
    fsblkcnt_t    f_bfree;     /* Total number of free blocks */
    fsblkcnt_t    f_bavail;    /* Number of free blocks available to
                                  unprivileged process */
    fsfilcnt_t    f_files;     /* Total number of i-nodes */
    fsfilcnt_t    f_ffree;     /* Total number of free i-nodes */
    fsfilcnt_t    f_favail;    /* Number of i-nodes available to unprivileged
                                  process (set to 'f_ffree' on Linux) */
    unsigned long f_fsid;      /* File-system ID */
    unsigned long f_flag;      /* Mount flags */
    unsigned long f_namemax;   /* Maximum length of filenames on
                                  this file system */
};

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The purpose of most of the fields in the <span class="docEmphasis">statvfs</span> structure is made clear in the comments above. We note a few further points regarding some fields:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">fsblkcnt_t</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fsfilcnt_t</span> data types are integer types specified by SUSv3.</p></li><li><p class="docList">For most Linux file systems, the values of <span class="docEmphasis">f_bsize</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">f_frsize</span>
 are the same. However, some file systems support the notion of block 
fragments, which can be used to allocate a smaller unit of storage at 
the end of the file if a full block is not required. This avoids the 
waste of space that would otherwise occur if a full block was allocated.
 On such file systems, <span class="docEmphasis">f_frsize</span> is the size of a fragment, and <span class="docEmphasis">f_bsize</span>
 is the size of a whole block. (The notion of fragments in UNIX file 
systems first appeared in the early 1980s with the 4.2BSD Fast File 
System, described in [McKusick et al., 1984].)</p></li><li><p class="docList">Many
 native UNIX and Linux file systems support the notion of reserving a 
certain portion of the blocks of a file system for the superuser, so 
that if the file system fills up, the superuser can still log in to the 
system and do some work to resolve the problem. If there are reserved 
blocks in the file system, then the difference in values of the <span class="docEmphasis">f_bfree</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">f_bavail</span> fields in the <span class="docEmphasis">statvfs</span> structure tells us how many blocks are reserved.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">f_flag</span> field is a bit mask of the flags used to mount the file system; that is, it contains information similar to the <span class="docEmphasis">mountflags</span> argument given to <span class="docEmphasis">mount(2)</span>. However, the constants used for the bits in this field have names starting with <tt>ST_</tt> instead of the <tt>MS_</tt> used for <span class="docEmphasis">mountflags</span>. SUSv3 requires only the <tt>ST_RDONLY</tt> and <tt>ST_NOSUID</tt> constants, but the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> implementation supports a full range of constants with names corresponding to the <tt>MS_*</tt> constants described for the <span class="docEmphasis">mount() mountflags</span> argument.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">f_fsid</span>
 field is used on some UNIX implementations to return a unique 
identifier for the file system—for example, a value based on the 
identifier of the device on which the file system resides. For most 
Linux file systems, this field contains 0.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">SUSv3 specifies both <span class="docEmphasis">statvfs()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fstatvfs()</span>. On Linux (as on several other UNIX implementations), these functions are layered on top of the quite similar <span class="docEmphasis">statfs()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fstatfs()</span> system calls. (Some UNIX implementations provide a <span class="docEmphasis">statfs()</span> system call, but don’t provide <span class="docEmphasis">statvfs()</span>.) The principal differences (aside from some differently named fields) are as follows</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">statvfs()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fstatvfs()</span> functions return the <span class="docEmphasis">f_flag</span> field, giving information about the file-system mount flags. (The <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> implementation obtains this information by scanning <tt>/proc/mounts</tt> or <tt>/etc/mtab</tt>.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">statfs()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fstatfs()</span> system calls return the field <span class="docEmphasis">f_type</span>, giving the type of the file system (e.g., the value <tt>0xef53</tt> indicates that this is an <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span> file system).</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <tt>filesys</tt> subdirectory in the source code distribution for this book contains two files, <tt>t_statvfs.c</tt> and <tt>t_statfs.c</tt>, demonstrating the use of <span class="docEmphasis">statvfs()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">statfs()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
