<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>14.12. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">14.12. Summary</h3><p class="docText">Devices are represented by entries in the <tt>/dev</tt>
 directory. Each device has a corresponding device driver, which 
implements a standard set of operations, including those corresponding 
to the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">close()</span>
 system calls. A device may be real, meaning that there is a 
corresponding hardware device, or virtual, meaning that no hardware 
device exists, but the kernel nevertheless provides a device driver that
 implements an API that is the same as a real device.</p><p class="docText">A
 hard disk is divided into one or more partitions, each of which may 
contain a file system. A file system is an organized collection of 
regular files and directories. Linux implements a wide variety of file 
systems, including the traditional <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span> file system. The <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span>
 file system is conceptually similar to early UNIX file systems, 
consisting of a boot block, a superblock, an i-node table, and a data 
area containing file data blocks. Each file has an entry in the file 
system’s i-node table. This entry contains various information about the
 file, including its type, size, link count, ownership, permissions, 
timestamps, and pointers to the file’s data blocks.</p><p class="docText">Linux provides a range of journaling file systems, including <span class="docEmphasis">Reiserfs</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ext3</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ext4</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">XFS</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">JFS</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">Btrfs</span>.
 A journaling file system records metadata updates (and optionally on 
some file systems, data updates) to a log file before the actual file 
updates are performed. This means that in the event of a system crash, 
the log file can be replayed to quickly restore the file system to a 
consistent state. The key benefit of journaling file systems is that 
they avoid the lengthy file-system consistency checks required by 
conventional UNIX file systems after a system crash.</p><p class="docText">All file systems on a Linux system are mounted under a single directory tree, with the directory <tt>/</tt> at its root. The location at which a file system is mounted in the directory tree is called its mount point.</p><p class="docText">A privileged process can mount and unmount a file system using the <span class="docEmphasis">mount()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">umount()</span> system calls. Information about a mounted file system can be retrieved using <span class="docEmphasis">statvfs()</span>.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGECI">14.12.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EKECI">14.12.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">For
 detailed information about devices and device drivers, see [Bovet &amp;
 Cesati, 2005] and especially [Corbet et al., 2005]. Some useful 
information about devices can be found in the kernel source file <tt>Documentation/devices.txt</tt>.</p><p class="docText">Several
 books provide further information about file systems. [Tanenbaum, 2007]
 is a general introduction to file-system structures and implementation.
 [Bach, 1986] provides an introduction to the implementation of UNIX 
file systems, oriented primarily toward System V. [Vahalia, 1996] and 
[Goodheart &amp; Cox, 1994] also describe the System V file-system 
implementation. [Love, 2010] and [Bovet &amp; Cesati, 2005] describe the
 Linux VFS implementation.</p><p class="docText">Documentation on various file systems can be found in the kernel source subdirectory <tt>Documentation/filesystems</tt>. Individual web sites can be found describing most of the file-system implementations available on Linux.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
