<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>14.13. Exercise</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">14.13. Exercise</h3><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write
 a program that measures the time required to create and then remove a 
large number of 1-byte files from a single directory. The program should
 create files with names of the form <tt>xNNNNNN</tt>, where <tt>NNNNNN</tt>
 is replaced by a random six-digit number. The files should be created 
in the random order in which their names are generated, and then deleted
 in increasing numerical order (i.e., an order that is different from 
that in which they were created). The number of files (<span class="docEmphasis">NF</span>)
 and the directory in which they are to be created should be specifiable
 on the command line. Measure the times required for different values of
 <span class="docEmphasis">NF</span> (e.g., in the range from 1000 to 20,000) and for different file systems (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ext3</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">XFS</span>). What patterns do you observe on each file system as <span class="docEmphasis">NF</span>
 increases? How do the various file systems compare? Do the results 
change if the files are created in increasing numerical order (<tt>x000001</tt>, <tt>x000001</tt>, <tt>x0000002</tt>,
 and so on) and then deleted in the same order? If so, what do you think
 the reason(s) might be? Again, do the results vary across file-system 
types?</p></div></li></ol></div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
