<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>15.3. File Ownership</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">15.3. File Ownership</h3><p class="docText">Each
 file has an associated user ID (UID) and group ID (GID). These IDs 
determine which user and group the file belongs to. We now look at the 
rules that determine the ownership of new files and describe the system 
calls used to change a file’s ownership.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6JCI">15.3.1. Ownership of New Files</h4><p class="docText">When
 a new file is created, its user ID is taken from the effective user ID 
of the process. The group ID of the new file may be taken from either 
the effective group ID of the process (equivalent to the System V 
default behavior) or the group ID of the parent directory (the BSD 
behavior). The latter possibility is useful for creating project 
directories in which all files belong to a particular group and are 
accessible to the members of that group. Which of the two values is used
 as the new file’s group ID is determined by various factors, including 
the type of file system on which the new file is created. We begin by 
describing the rules followed by <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span> and a few other file systems.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">To be accurate, on Linux, all uses of the terms <span class="docEmphasis">effective user</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">group ID</span> in this section should really be <span class="docEmphasis">file-system user</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">group ID</span> (Section 9.5).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">When an <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span> file system is mounted, either the <span class="docEmphasis">-o grpid</span> (or the synonymous <span class="docEmphasis">-o bsdgroups</span>) option or the <span class="docEmphasis">-o nogrpid</span> (or the synonymous <span class="docEmphasis">-o sysvgroups</span>) option may be specified to the <span class="docEmphasis">mount</span> command. (If neither option is specified, the default is <span class="docEmphasis">-o nogrpid</span>.) If <span class="docEmphasis">-o grpid</span> is specified, then a new file always inherits its group ID from the parent directory. If <span class="docEmphasis">-o nogrpid</span>
 is specified, then, by default, a new file takes its group ID from the 
process’s effective group ID. However, if the set-group-ID bit is 
enabled for the directory (via <span class="docEmphasis">chmod g+s</span>), then the group ID of the file is inherited from the parent directory. These rules are summarized in Table 15-3.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In Section 18.6,
 we’ll see that when the set-group-ID bit is set on a directory, then it
 is also set on new subdirectories created within that directory. In 
this manner, the set-group-ID behavior described in the main text is 
propagated down through an entire directory tree.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 15-3. Rules determining the group ownership of a newly created file</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">File system mount option</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Set-group-ID bit enabled on parent directory?</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Group ownership of new file taken from</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">-o grpid</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">-o bsdgroups</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">(ignored)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">parent directory group ID</td></tr><tr><td align="center" class="docTableCell" rowspan="2" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">-o nogrpid</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">-o sysvgroups</span> (<span class="docEmphasis">default</span>)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">no</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">process effective group ID</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">parent directory group ID</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">At the time of writing, the only file systems that support the <span class="docEmphasis">grpid</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">nogrpid</span> mount options are <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ext3</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ext4</span>, and (since Linux 2.6.14) <span class="docEmphasis">XFS</span>. Other file systems follow the <span class="docEmphasis">nogrpid</span> rules.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKPCI">15.3.2. Changing File Ownership: <span class="docEmphasis">chown()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fchown()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">lchown()</span></h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">chown()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">lchown()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">fchown()</span> system calls change the owner (user ID) and group (group ID) of a file.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

int <b>chown</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, uid_t <span class="docEmphasis">owner</span>, gid_t <span class="docEmphasis">group</span>);
int <b>lchown</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, uid_t <span class="docEmphasis">owner</span>, gid_t <span class="docEmphasis">group</span>);
int <b>fchown</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, uid_t <span class="docEmphasis">owner</span>, gid_t <span class="docEmphasis">group</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">All return 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The distinction between these three system calls is similar to the <span class="docEmphasis">stat()</span> family of system calls:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">chown()</span> changes the ownership of the file named in the <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> argument;</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">lchown()</span> does the same, except that if <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> is a symbolic link, ownership of the link file is changed, rather than the file to which it refers; and</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">fchown()</span> changes the ownership of a file referred to by the open file descriptor, <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">owner</span> argument specifies the new user ID for the file, and the <span class="docEmphasis">group</span>
 argument specifies the new group ID for the file. To change just one of
 the IDs, we can specify -1 for the other argument to leave that ID 
unchanged.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Prior to Linux 2.2, <span class="docEmphasis">chown()</span> did not dereference symbolic links. The semantics of <span class="docEmphasis">chown()</span> were changed with Linux 2.2, and the new <span class="docEmphasis">lchown()</span> system call was added to provide the behavior of the old <span class="docEmphasis">chown()</span> system call.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Only a privileged (<tt>CAP_CHOWN</tt>) process may use <span class="docEmphasis">chown()</span> to change the user ID of a file. An unprivileged process can use <span class="docEmphasis">chown()</span>
 to change the group ID of a file that it owns (i.e., the process’s 
effective user ID matches the user ID of the file) to any of the groups 
of which they are a member. A privileged process can change the group ID
 of a file to any value.</p><p class="docText">If
 the owner or group of a file is changed, then the set-user-ID and 
set-group-ID permission bits are both turned off. This is a security 
precaution to ensure that a normal user could not enable the set-user-ID
 (or set-group-ID) bit on an executable file and then somehow make it 
owned by some privileged user (or group), thereby gaining that 
privileged identity when executing the file.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">SUSv3
 leaves it unspecified whether the set-user-ID and set-group-ID bits 
should be turned off when the superuser changes the owner or group of an
 executable file. Linux 2.0 did turn these bits off in this case, while 
some of the early 2.2 kernels (up to 2.2.12) did not. Later 2.2 kernels 
returned to the 2.0 behavior, where changes by the superuser are treated
 the same as everyone else, and this behavior is maintained in 
subsequent kernel versions. (However, if we use the <span class="docEmphasis">chown(1)</span> command under a <span class="docEmphasis">root</span> login to change the ownership of a file, then, after calling <span class="docEmphasis">chown(2)</span>, the <span class="docEmphasis">chown</span> command uses the <span class="docEmphasis">chmod()</span> system call to reenable the set-user-ID and set-group-ID bits.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">When
 changing the owner or group of a file, the set-group-ID permission bit 
is not turned off if the group-execute permission bit is already off or 
if we are changing the ownership of a directory. In both of these cases,
 the set-group-ID bit is being used for a purpose other than the 
creation of a set-group-ID program, and therefore it is undesirable to 
turn the bit off. These other uses of the set-group-ID bit are as 
follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">If the 
group-execute permission bit is off, then the set-group-ID permission 
bit is being used to enable mandatory file locking (discussed in Section 55.4).</p></li><li><p class="docList">In the case of a directory, the set-group-ID bit is being used to control the ownership of new files created in the directory (Section 15.3.1).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The use of <span class="docEmphasis">chown()</span> is demonstrated in Example 15-2,
 a program that allows the user to change the owner and group of an 
arbitrary number of files, specified as command-line arguments. (This 
program uses the <span class="docEmphasis">userIdFromName()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">groupIdFromName()</span> functions from Example 8-1, in Section 8.4.1.3, to convert user and group names into corresponding numeric IDs.)</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ECXCI">Example 15-2. Changing the owner and group of a file</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>files/t_chown.c</b>
#include &lt;pwd.h&gt;
#include &lt;grp.h&gt;
#include "ugid_functions.h"             /* Declarations of userIdFromName()
                                           and groupIdFromName() */
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    uid_t uid;
    gid_t gid;
    int j;
    Boolean errFnd;

    if (argc &lt; 3 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s owner group [file...]\n"
                "        owner or group can be '-', "
                "meaning leave unchanged\n", argv[0]);

    if (strcmp(argv[1], "-") == 0) {            /* "-" ==&gt; don't change owner */
        uid = -1;
    } else {                                    /* Turn user name into UID */
        uid = userIdFromName(argv[1]);
        if (uid == -1)
            fatal("No such user (%s)", argv[1]);
    }

    if (strcmp(argv[2], "-") == 0) {            /* "-" ==&gt; don't change group */
        gid = -1;
    } else {                                    /* Turn group name into GID */
        gid = groupIdFromName(argv[2]);
        if (gid == -1)
            fatal("No group user (%s)", argv[1]);
    }

    /* Change ownership of all files named in remaining arguments */

    errFnd = FALSE;
    for (j = 3; j &lt; argc; j++) {
        if (chown(argv[j], uid, gid) == -1) {
            errMsg("chown: %s", argv[j]);
            errFnd = TRUE;
        }
    }

    exit(errFnd ? EXIT_FAILURE : EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>files/t_chown.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
