<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>15.4. File Permissions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">15.4. File Permissions</h3><p class="docText">In
 this section, we describe the permission scheme applied to files and 
directories. Although we talk about permissions here mainly as they 
apply to regular files and directories, the rules that we describe apply
 to all types of files, including devices, FIFOs, and UNIX domain 
sockets. Furthermore, the System V and POSIX interprocess communication 
objects (shared memory, semaphores, and message queues) also have 
permission masks, and the rules that apply for these objects are similar
 to those for files.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EFMCI">15.4.1. Permissions on Regular Files</h4><p class="docText">As noted in Section 15.1, the bottom 12 bits of the <span class="docEmphasis">st_mode</span> field of the <span class="docEmphasis">stat</span>
 structure define the permissions for a file. The first 3 of these bits 
are special bits known as the set-user-ID, set-group-ID, and sticky bits
 (labeled U, G, and T, respectively, in Figure 15-1). We say more about these bits in Section 15.4.5.
 The remaining 9 bits form the mask defining the permissions that are 
granted to various categories of users accessing the file. The file 
permissions mask divides the world into three categories:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Owner</span> (also known as <span class="docEmphasis">user</span>): The permissions granted to the owner of the file.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The term <span class="docEmphasis">user</span> is used by commands such as <span class="docEmphasis">chmod(1)</span>, which uses the abbreviation <span class="docEmphasis">u</span> to refer to this permission category.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Group</span>: The permissions granted to users who are members of the file’s group.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Other</span>: The permissions granted to everyone else.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Three permissions may be granted to each user category:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Read</span>: The contents of the file may be read.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Write</span>: The contents of the file may be changed.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Execute</span>: The file may be executed (i.e., it is a program or a script). In order to execute a script file (e.g., a <span class="docEmphasis">bash</span> script), both read and execute permissions are required.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The permissions and ownership of a file can be viewed using the command <span class="docEmphasis">ls -l</span>, as in the following example:</p><pre>$ <b>ls -l myscript.sh</b>
-<b>rwxr-x---</b>    1 mtk      users        1667 Jan 15 09:22 myscript.sh</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In the above example, the file permissions are displayed as <tt>rwxr-x---</tt>
 (the initial hyphen preceding this string indicates the type of this 
file: a regular file). To interpret this string, we break these 9 
characters into sets of 3 characters, which respectively indicate 
whether read, write, and execute permission are enabled. The first set 
indicates the permissions for owner, which has read, write, and execute 
permissions enabled. The next set indicates the permissions for group, 
which has read and execute enabled, but not write. The final set are the
 permissions for other, which doesn’t have any permissions enabled.</p><p class="docText">The <tt>&lt;sys/stat.h&gt;</tt> header file defines constants that can be ANDed (<tt>&amp;</tt>) with <span class="docEmphasis">st_mode</span> of the <span class="docEmphasis">stat</span>
 structure, in order to check whether particular permission bits are 
set. (These constants are also defined via the inclusion of <tt>&lt;fcntl.h&gt;</tt>, which prototypes the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> system call.) These constants are shown in Table 15-4.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 15-4. Constants for file permission bits</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Constant</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Octal value</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Permission bit</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>S_ISUID</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>04000</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Set-user-ID</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>S_ISGID</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>02000</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Set-group-ID</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>S_ISVTX</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>01000</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Sticky</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>S_IRUSR</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>0400</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">User-read</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>S_IWUSR</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>0200</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">User-write</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>S_IXUSR</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>0100</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">User-execute</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>S_IRGRP</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>040</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Group-read</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>S_IWGRP</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>020</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Group-write</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>S_IXGRP</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>010</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Group-execute</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>S_IROTH</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>04</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Other-read</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>S_IWOTH</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>02</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Other-write</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>S_IXOTH</tt></td><td align="right" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>01</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Other-execute</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">In addition to the constants shown in Table 15-4, three constants are defined to equate to masks for all three permissions for each of the categories owner, group, and other: <tt>S_IRWXU</tt> (0700), <tt>S_IRWXG</tt> (070), and <tt>S_IRWXO</tt> (07).</p><p class="docText">The header file in Example 15-3 declares a function, <span class="docEmphasis">filePermStr()</span>,
 which, given a file permissions mask, returns a statically allocated 
string representation of that mask in the same style as is used by <span class="docEmphasis">ls(1)</span>.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EU2CI">Example 15-3. Header file for <tt>file_perms.c</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedWidth"><b>files/file_perms.h</b>
#ifndef FILE_PERMS_H
#define FILE_PERMS_H

#include &lt;sys/types.h&gt;

#define FP_SPECIAL 1            /* Include set-user-ID, set-group-ID, and sticky
                                   bit information in returned string */

char *filePermStr(mode_t perm, int flags);

#endif
      <b>files/file_perms.h</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">If the <tt>FP_SPECIAL</tt> flag is set in the <span class="docEmphasis">filePermStr() flags</span>
 argument, then the returned string includes the settings of the 
set-user-ID, set-group-ID, and sticky bits, again in the style of <span class="docEmphasis">ls(1)</span>.</p><p class="docText">The implementation of the <span class="docEmphasis">filePermStr()</span> function is shown in Example 15-4. We employ this function in the program in Example 15-1.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EY3CI">Example 15-4. Convert file permissions mask to string</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>files/file_perms.c</b>
#include &lt;sys/stat.h&gt;
#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;
#include "file_perms.h"                 /* Interface for this implementation */

#define STR_SIZE sizeof("rwxrwxrwx")

char *          /* Return ls(1)-style string for file permissions mask */
filePermStr(mode_t perm, int flags)
{
    static char str[STR_SIZE];

    snprintf(str, STR_SIZE, "%c%c%c%c%c%c%c%c%c",
        (perm &amp; S_IRUSR) ? 'r' : '-', (perm &amp; S_IWUSR) ? 'w' : '-',
        (perm &amp; S_IXUSR) ?
            (((perm &amp; S_ISUID) &amp;&amp; (flags &amp; FP_SPECIAL)) ? 's' : 'x') :
            (((perm &amp; S_ISUID) &amp;&amp; (flags &amp; FP_SPECIAL)) ? 'S' : '-'),
        (perm &amp; S_IRGRP) ? 'r' : '-', (perm &amp; S_IWGRP) ? 'w' : '-',
        (perm &amp; S_IXGRP) ?
            (((perm &amp; S_ISGID) &amp;&amp; (flags &amp; FP_SPECIAL)) ? 's' : 'x') :
            (((perm &amp; S_ISGID) &amp;&amp; (flags &amp; FP_SPECIAL)) ? 'S' : '-'),
        (perm &amp; S_IROTH) ? 'r' : '-', (perm &amp; S_IWOTH) ? 'w' : '-',
        (perm &amp; S_IXOTH) ?
            (((perm &amp; S_ISVTX) &amp;&amp; (flags &amp; FP_SPECIAL)) ? 't' : 'x') :
            (((perm &amp; S_ISVTX) &amp;&amp; (flags &amp; FP_SPECIAL)) ? 'T' : '-'));

    return str;
}
      <b>files/file_perms.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ED4CI">15.4.2. Permissions on Directories</h4><p class="docText">Directories have the same permission scheme as files. However, the three permissions are interpreted differently:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Read</span>: The contents (i.e., the list of filenames) of the directory may be listed (e.g., by <span class="docEmphasis">ls</span>).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">If experimenting to verify the operation of the directory read permission bit, be aware that some Linux distributions alias the <span class="docEmphasis">ls</span> command to include flags (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">-F</span>)
 that require access to i-node information for files in the directory, 
and this requires execute permission on the directory. To ensure that we
 are using an unadulterated ls, we can specify the full pathname of the 
command <tt>(/bin/ls)</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Write</span>:
 Files may be created in and removed from the directory. Note that it is
 not necessary to have any permission on a file itself in order to be 
able to delete it.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Execute</span>: Files within the directory may be accessed. Execute permission on a directory is sometimes called <span class="docEmphasis">search</span> permission.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">When
 accessing a file, execute permission is required on all of the 
directories listed in the pathname. For example, reading the file <tt>/home/mtk/x</tt> would require execute permission on <tt>/</tt>, <tt>/home</tt>, and <tt>/home/mtk</tt> (as well as read permission on the file <tt>x</tt> itself). If the current working directory is <tt>/home/mtk/sub1</tt> and we access the relative pathname <tt>../sub2/x</tt>, then we need execute permission on <tt>/home/mtk</tt> and <tt>/home/mtk/sub2</tt> (but not on <tt>/</tt> or <tt>/home</tt>).</p><p class="docText">Read
 permission on a directory only lets us view the list of filenames in 
the directory. We must have execute permission on the directory in order
 to access the contents or the i-node information of files in the 
directory.</p><p class="docText">Conversely,
 if we have execute permission on a directory, but not read permission, 
then we can access a file in the directory if we know its name, but we 
can’t list the contents of (i.e., the other filenames in) the directory.
 This is a simple and frequently used technique to control access to the
 contents of a public directory.</p><p class="docText">To add or remove files in a directory, we need both execute and write permissions on the directory.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EZ6CI">15.4.3. Permission-Checking Algorithm</h4><p class="docText">The
 kernel checks file permissions whenever we specify a pathname in a 
system call that accesses a file or directory. When the pathname given 
to the system call includes a directory prefix, then, in addition to 
checking for the required permissions on the file itself, the kernel 
also checks for execute permission on each of the directories in this 
prefix. Permission checks are made using the process’s effective user 
ID, effective group ID, and supplementary group IDs. (To be strictly 
accurate, for file permission checks on Linux, the file-system user and 
group IDs are used instead of the corresponding effective IDs, as 
described in Section 9.5.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Once a file has been opened with <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>, no permission checking is performed by subsequent system calls that work with the returned file descriptor (such as <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fstat()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span>).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The rules applied by the kernel when checking permissions are as follows:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If the process is privileged, all access is granted.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If the effective user ID of the process is the same as the user ID (owner) of the file, then access is granted according to the <span class="docEmphasis">owner</span>
 permissions on the file. For example, read access is granted if the 
owner-read permission bit is turned on in the file permissions mask; 
otherwise, read access is denied.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If
 the effective group ID of the process or any of the process 
supplementary group IDs matches the group ID (group owner) of the file, 
then access is granted according to the <span class="docEmphasis">group</span> permissions on the file.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Otherwise, access is granted according to the <span class="docEmphasis">other</span> permissions on the file.</p></div></li></ol></div><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In
 the kernel code, the above tests are actually constructed so that the 
test to see whether a process is privileged is performed only if the 
process is not granted the permissions it needs via one of the other 
tests. This is done to avoid unnecessarily setting the <tt>ASU</tt> process accounting flag, which indicates that the process made use of superuser privileges (Section 28.1).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The
 checks against owner, group, and other permissions are done in order, 
and checking stops as soon as the applicable rule is found. This can 
have an unexpected consequence: if, for example, the permissions for 
group exceed those of owner, then the owner will actually have fewer 
permissions on the file than members of the file’s group, as illustrated
 by the following example:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>echo 'Hello world' &gt; a.txt </b>
$ <b>ls -l a.txt </b>
-rw-r--r--   1 mtk    users    12 Jun 18 12:26 a.txt
$ <b>chmod u-rw a.txt </b>               <i> Remove read and write permission from owner</i>
$ <b>ls -l a.txt </b>
----r--r--   1 mtk    users    12 Jun 18 12:26 a.txt
$ <b>cat a.txt </b>
cat: a.txt: Permission denied    <i> Owner can no longer read file</i>
$ <b>su avr </b>                         <i> Become someone else...</i>
Password:
$ <b>groups </b>                         <i> who is in the group owning the file...</i>
users staff teach cs
$ <b>cat a.txt </b>                      <i> and thus can read the file</i>
Hello world

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Similar remarks apply if other grants more permissions than owner or group.</p><p class="docText">Since
 file permissions and ownership information are maintained within a file
 i-node, all filenames (links) that refer to the same i-node share this 
information.</p><p class="docText">Linux 
2.6 provides access control lists (ACLs), which make it possible to 
define file permissions on a per-user and per-group basis. If a file has
 an ACL, then a modified version of the above algorithm is used. We 
describe ACLs in Chapter 17.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EMDDI">15.4.3.1. Permission checking for privileged processes</h5><p class="docText">Above,
 we said that if a process is privileged, all access is granted when 
checking permissions. We need to add one proviso to this statement. For a
 file that is not a directory, Linux grants execute permission to a 
privileged process only if that permission is granted to at least one of
 the permission categories for the file. On some other UNIX 
implementations, a privileged process can execute a file even when no 
permission category grants execute permission. When accessing a 
directory, a privileged process is always granted execute (search) 
permission.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">We can rephrase our description of a privileged process in terms of two Linux process capabilities: <tt>CAP_DAC_READ_SEARCH</tt> and <tt>CAP_DAC_OVERRIDE</tt> (Section 39.2). A process with the <tt>CAP_DAC_READ_SEARCH</tt>
 capability always has read permission for any type of file, and always 
has read and execute permissions for a directory (i.e., can always 
access files in a directory and read the list of files in a directory). A
 process with the <tt>CAP_DAC_OVERRIDE</tt>
 capability always has read and write permissions for any type of file, 
and also has execute permission if the file is a directory or if execute
 permission is granted to at least one of the permission categories for 
the file.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGFDI">15.4.4. Checking File Accessibility: <span class="docEmphasis">access()</span></h4><p class="docText">As noted in Section 15.4.3, the <span class="docEmphasis">effective</span>
 user and group IDs, as well as supplementary group IDs, are used to 
determine the permissions a process has when accessing a file. It is 
also possible for a program (e.g., a set-user-ID or set-group-ID 
program) to check file accessibility based on the <span class="docEmphasis">real</span> user and group IDs of the process.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">access()</span> system call checks the accessibility of the file specified in <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> based on a process’s real user and group IDs (and supplementary group IDs).</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

int <b>access</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 if all permissions are granted, otherwise -1</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> is a symbolic link, <span class="docEmphasis">access()</span> dereferences it.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> argument is a bit mask consisting of one or more of the constants shown in Table 15-5, ORed (<tt>|</tt>) together. If all of the permissions specified in <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> are granted on <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, then <span class="docEmphasis">access()</span> returns 0; if at least one of the requested permissions is not available (or an error occurred), then <span class="docEmphasis">access()</span> returns -1.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 15-5. <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> constants for <span class="docEmphasis">access()</span></h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Constant</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>F_OK</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Does the file exist?</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>R_OK</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Can the file be read?</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>W_OK</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Can the file be written?</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X_OK</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Can the file be executed?</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">The time gap between a call to <span class="docEmphasis">access()</span> and a subsequent operation on a file means that there is no guarantee that the information returned by <span class="docEmphasis">access()</span>
 will still be true at the time of the later operation (no matter how 
brief the interval). This situation could lead to security holes in some
 application designs.</p><p class="docText">Suppose, for example, that we have a set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span> program that uses <span class="docEmphasis">access()</span> to check that a file is accessible to the real user ID of the program, and, if so, performs an operation on the file (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>).</p><p class="docText">The problem is that if the pathname given to <span class="docEmphasis">access()</span>
 is a symbolic link, and a malicious user manages to change the link so 
that it refers to a different file before the second step, then the 
set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span> 
may end up operating on a file for which the real user ID does not have 
permission. (This is an example of the type of time-of-check, 
time-of-use race condition described in Section 38.6.) For this reason, 
recommended practice is to avoid the use of <span class="docEmphasis">access()</span>
 altogether (see, for example, [Borisov, 2005]). In the example just 
given, we can achieve this by temporarily changing the effective (or 
file system) user ID of the set-user-ID process, attempting the desired 
operation (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>), and then checking the return value and <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> to determine whether the operation failed because of a permissions problem.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The GNU C library provides an analogous, nonstandard function, <span class="docEmphasis">euidaccess()</span> (or synonymously, <span class="docEmphasis">eaccess()</span>), that checks file access permissions using the effective user ID of the process.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5LDI">15.4.5. Set-User-ID, Set-Group-ID, and Sticky Bits</h4><p class="docText">As
 well as the 9 bits used for owner, group, and other permissions, the 
file permissions mask contains 3 additional bits, known as the <span class="docEmphasis">set-user-ID</span> (bit 04000), <span class="docEmphasis">set-group-ID</span> (bit 02000), and <span class="docEmphasis">sticky</span>
 (bit 01000) bits. We have already discussed the use of the set-user-ID 
and set-group-ID permission bits for creating privileged programs in 
Section 9.3. The set-group-ID bit also serves two other purposes that we
 describe elsewhere: controlling the group ownership of new files 
created in a directory mounted with the <span class="docEmphasis">nogrpid</span> option (Section 15.3.1), and enabling mandatory locking on a file (Section 55.4). In the remainder of this section, we limit our discussion to the use of the sticky bit.</p><p class="docText">On
 older UNIX implementations, the sticky bit was provided as a way of 
making commonly used programs run faster. If the sticky bit was set on a
 program file, then the first time the program was executed, a copy of 
the program text was saved in the swap area—thus it <span class="docEmphasis">sticks</span>
 in swap, and loads faster on subsequent executions. Modern UNIX 
implementations have more sophisticated memory-management systems, which
 have rendered this use of the sticky permission bit obsolete.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The name of the constant for the sticky permission bit shown in Table 15-4, <tt>S_ISVTX</tt>, derives from an alternative name for the sticky bit: the <span class="docEmphasis">saved-text</span> bit.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">In
 modern UNIX implementations (including Linux), the sticky permission 
bit serves another, quite different purpose. For directories, the sticky
 bit acts as the <span class="docEmphasis">restricted deletion</span> flag. Setting this bit on a directory means that an unprivileged process can unlink (<span class="docEmphasis">unlink()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">rmdir()</span>) and rename (<span class="docEmphasis">rename()</span>) files in the directory only if it has write permission on the directory <span class="docEmphasis">and</span> owns either the file or the directory. (A process with the <tt>CAP_FOWNER</tt>
 capability can bypass the latter ownership check.) This makes it 
possible to create a directory that is shared by many users, who can 
each create and delete their own files in the directory but can’t delete
 files owned by other users. The sticky permission bit is commonly set 
on the <tt>/tmp</tt> directory for this reason.</p><p class="docText">A file’s sticky permission bit is set via the <span class="docEmphasis">chmod</span> command (<span class="docEmphasis">chmod +t file</span>) or via the <span class="docEmphasis">chmod()</span> system call. If the sticky bit for a file is set, <span class="docEmphasis">ls -l</span> shows a lowercase or uppercase letter <span class="docEmphasis">T</span> in the other-execute permission field, depending on whether the other-execute permission bit is on or off, as in the following:</p><pre>$ <b>touch tfile</b>
$ <b>ls -l tfile</b>
-rw-r--r--   1 mtk    users     0 Jun 23 14:44 tfile
$ <b>chmod +t tfile</b>
$ <b>ls -l tfile</b>
-rw-r--r-T   1 mtk    users     0 Jun 23 14:44 tfile
$ <b>chmod o+x tfile</b>
$ <b>ls -l tfile</b>
-rw-r--r-t   1 mtk    users     0 Jun 23 14:44 tfile</pre><br/>
<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E1QDI">15.4.6. The Process File Mode Creation Mask: <span class="docEmphasis">umask()</span></h4><p class="docText">We
 now consider in more detail the permissions that are placed on a newly 
created file or directory. For new files, the kernel uses the 
permissions specified in the <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> argument to <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">creat()</span>. For new directories, permissions are set according to the <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> argument to <span class="docEmphasis">mkdir()</span>. However, these settings are modified by the file mode creation mask, also known simply as the <span class="docEmphasis">umask</span>. The umask is a process attribute that specifies which permission bits should always be turned <span class="docEmphasis">off</span> when new files or directories are created by the process.</p><p class="docText">Often,
 a process just uses the umask it inherits from its parent shell, with 
the (usually desirable) consequence that the user can control the umask 
of programs executed from the shell using the shell built-in command <span class="docEmphasis">umask</span>, which changes the umask of the shell process.</p><p class="docText">The initialization files for most shells set the default umask to the octal value 022 (<tt>----w--w-</tt>). This value specifies that write permission should always be turned off for group and other. Thus, assuming the <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> argument in a call to <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>
 is 0666 (i.e., read and write permitted for all users, which is 
typical), then new files are created with read and write permissions for
 owner, and only read permission for everyone else (displayed by <span class="docEmphasis">ls -l</span> as <tt>rw-r--r--</tt>). Correspondingly, assuming that the <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> argument to <span class="docEmphasis">mkdir()</span>
 is specified as 0777 (i.e., all permissions granted to all users), new 
directories are created with all permissions granted for owner, and just
 read and execute permissions for group and other (i.e., <tt>rwxr-xr-x</tt>).</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">umask()</span> system call changes a process’s umask to the value specified in <span class="docEmphasis">mask</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/stat.h&gt;

mode_t <b>umask</b>(mode_t <span class="docEmphasis">mask</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Always successfully returns the previous process umask</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mask</span> argument can be specified either as an octal number or by ORing (<tt>|</tt>) together the constants listed in Table 15-4.</p><p class="docText">A call to <span class="docEmphasis">umask()</span> is always successful, and returns the previous umask.</p><p class="docText">Example 15-5 illustrates the use of <span class="docEmphasis">umask()</span> in conjunction with <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">mkdir()</span>. When we run this program, we see the following:</p><pre>$ <b>./t_umask </b>
Requested file perms: rw-rw----             <i> This is what we asked for</i>
Process umask:        ----wx-wx             <i> This is what we are denied</i>
Actual file perms:    rw-r-----             <i> So this is what we end up with</i>

Requested dir. perms: rwxrwxrwx
Process umask:        ----wx-wx
Actual dir. perms:    rwxr--r--</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In Example 15-5, we employ the <span class="docEmphasis">mkdir()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">rmdir()</span> system calls to create and remove a directory, and the <span class="docEmphasis">unlink()</span> system call to remove a file. We describe these system calls in Chapter 18.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ENWDI">Example 15-5. Using <span class="docEmphasis">umask()</span></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>files/t_umask.c</b>
#include &lt;sys/stat.h&gt;
#include &lt;fcntl.h&gt;
#include "file_perms.h"
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

#define MYFILE "myfile"
#define MYDIR  "mydir"
#define FILE_PERMS    (S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR | S_IRGRP | S_IWGRP)
#define DIR_PERMS     (S_IRWXU | S_IRWXG | S_IRWXO)
#define UMASK_SETTING (S_IWGRP | S_IXGRP | S_IWOTH | S_IXOTH)

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int fd;
    struct stat sb;
    mode_t u;

    umask(UMASK_SETTING);

    fd = open(MYFILE, O_RDWR | O_CREAT | O_EXCL, FILE_PERMS);
    if (fd == -1)
        errExit("open-%s", MYFILE);
    if (mkdir(MYDIR, DIR_PERMS) == -1)
        errExit("mkdir-%s", MYDIR);

    u = umask(0);               /* Retrieves (and clears) umask value */

    if (stat(MYFILE, &amp;sb) == -1)
        errExit("stat-%s", MYFILE);
    printf("Requested file perms: %s\n", filePermStr(FILE_PERMS, 0));
    printf("Process umask:        %s\n", filePermStr(u, 0));
    printf("Actual file perms:    %s\n\n", filePermStr(sb.st_mode, 0));

    if (stat(MYDIR, &amp;sb) == -1)
        errExit("stat-%s", MYDIR);
    printf("Requested dir. perms: %s\n", filePermStr(DIR_PERMS, 0));
    printf("Process umask:        %s\n", filePermStr(u, 0));
    printf("Actual dir. perms:    %s\n", filePermStr(sb.st_mode, 0));

    if (unlink(MYFILE) == -1)
        errMsg("unlink-%s", MYFILE);
    if (rmdir(MYDIR) == -1)
        errMsg("rmdir-%s", MYDIR);
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>files/t_umask.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E1WDI">15.4.7. Changing File Permissions: <span class="docEmphasis">chmod()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fchmod()</span></h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">chmod()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fchmod()</span> system calls change the permissions of a file.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/stat.h&gt;

int <b>chmod</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, mode_t <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span>);
int <b>fchmod</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, mode_t <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Both return 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">chmod()</span> system call changes the permissions of the file named in <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>. If this argument is a symbolic link, <span class="docEmphasis">chmod()</span>
 changes the permissions of the file to which it refers, rather than the
 permissions of the link itself. (A symbolic link is always created with
 read, write, and execute permissions enabled for all users, and these 
permission can’t be changed. These permissions are ignored when 
dereferencing the link.)</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">fchmod()</span> system call changes the permissions on the file referred to by the open file descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span>
 argument specifies the new permissions of the file, either numerically 
(octal) or as a mask formed by ORing (|) the permission bits listed in Table 15-4. In order to change the permissions on a file, either the process must be privileged (<tt>CAP_FOWNER</tt>)
 or its effective user ID must match the owner (user ID) of the file. 
(To be strictly accurate, on Linux, for an unprivileged process, it is 
the process’s file-system user ID, rather than its effective user ID, 
that must match the user ID of the file, as described in Section 9.5.)</p><p class="docText">To set the permissions on a file so that only read permission is granted to all users, we could use the following call:</p><pre>if (chmod("myfile", S_IRUSR | S_IRGRP | S_IROTH) == -1)
    errExit("chmod");
/* Or equivalently: chmod("myfile", 0444); */</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In order to modify selected bits of the file permissions, we first retrieve the existing permissions using <span class="docEmphasis">stat()</span>, tweak the bits we want to change, and then use <span class="docEmphasis">chmod()</span> to update the permissions:</p><pre>struct stat sb;
mode_t mode;

if (stat("myfile", &amp;sb) == -1)
    errExit("stat");
mode = (sb.st_mode | S_IWUSR) &amp; ~S_IROTH;
       /* owner-write on, other-read off, remaining bits unchanged */
if (chmod("myfile", mode) == -1)
    errExit("chmod");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The above is equivalent to the following shell command:</p><pre>$ <b>chmod u+w,o-r myfile</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In Section 15.3.1, we noted that if a directory resides on an <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span> system mounted with the <span class="docEmphasis">-o bsdgroups</span> option, or on one mounted with the <span class="docEmphasis">-o sysvgroups</span> option <span class="docEmphasis">and</span>
 the set-group-ID permission bit is turned on for the directory, then a 
newly created file in the directory takes its ownership from the parent 
directory, not the effective group ID of the creating process. It may be
 the case that the group ID of such a file doesn’t match any of the 
group IDs of the creating process. For this reason, when an unprivileged
 process (one that doesn’t have the <tt>CAP_FSETID</tt> capability) calls <span class="docEmphasis">chmod()</span> (or <span class="docEmphasis">fchmod()</span>)
 on a file whose group ID is not equal to the effective group ID or any 
of the supplementary group IDs of the process, the kernel always clears 
the set-group-ID permission bit. This is a security measure designed to 
prevent a user from creating a set-group-ID program for a group of which
 they are not a member. The following shell commands show the attempted 
exploit that this measure prevents:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>mount | grep test </b>                <i> Hmmm,</i> /test <i> is mounted with -o bsdgroups</i>
/dev/sda9 on /test type ext3 (rw,bsdgroups)
$ <b>ls -ld /test </b>                     <i> Directory has GID root, writable by anyone</i>
drwxrwxrwx   3 root   root    4096 Jun 30 20:11 /test
$ <b>id </b>                               <i> I'm an ordinary user, not part of root group</i>
uid=1000(mtk) gid=100(users) groups=100(users),101(staff),104(teach)
$ <b>cd /test </b>
$ <b>cp ~/myprog . </b>                    <i> Copy some mischievous program here</i>
$ <b>ls -l myprog </b>                     <i> Hey! It's in the root group!</i>
-rwxr-xr-x   1 mtk    root   19684 Jun 30 20:43 myprog
$ <b>chmod g+s myprog </b>                 <i> Can I make it set-group-ID to root?</i>
$ <b>ls -l myprog </b>                     <i> Hmm, no...</i>
-rwxr-xr-x   1 mtk    root   19684 Jun 30 20:43 myprog

					  </pre><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
