<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>15.5. I-node Flags (ext2 Extended File Attributes)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">15.5. I-node Flags (<span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span> Extended File Attributes)</h3><p class="docText">Some Linux file systems allow various <span class="docEmphasis">i-node flags</span> to be set on files and directories. This feature is a nonstandard Linux extension.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The modern BSDs provide a similar feature to i-node flags in the form of file flags set using <span class="docEmphasis">chflags(1)</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">chflags(2)</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The first Linux file system to support i-node flags was <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span>, and these flags are sometimes referred to as <span class="docEmphasis">ext2 extended file attributes</span>. Subsequently, support for i-node flags has been added on other file systems, including <span class="docEmphasis">Btrfs</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ext3</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ext4</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">Reiserfs</span> (since Linux 2.4.19), <span class="docEmphasis">XFS</span> (since Linux 2.4.25 and 2.6), and <span class="docEmphasis">JFS</span> (since Linux 2.6.17).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The range of i-node flags supported varies somewhat across file systems. In order to use i-node flags on a <span class="docEmphasis">Reiserfs</span> file system, we must use the <span class="docEmphasis">mount -o attrs</span> option when mounting the file system.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">From the shell, i-node flags can be set and viewed using the <span class="docEmphasis">chattr</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">lsattr</span> commands, as shown in the following example:</p><pre>$ <b>lsattr myfile </b>
-------- myfile
$ <b>chattr +ai myfile </b>               <i> Turn on Append Only and Immutable flags</i>
$ <b>lsattr myfile </b>
----ia-- myfile</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Within a program, i-node flags can be retrieved and modified using the <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> system call, as detailed shortly.</p><p class="docText">I-node
 flags can be set on both regular files and directories. Most i-node 
flags are intended for use with regular files, although some of them 
also (or only) have meaning for directories. Table 15-6 summarizes the range of available i-node flags, showing the corresponding flag name (defined in <tt>&lt;linux/fs.h&gt;</tt>) that is used from programs in <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> calls, and the option letter that is used with the <span class="docEmphasis">chattr</span> command.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Before Linux 2.6.19, the <tt>FS_*</tt> constants shown in Table 15-6 were not defined in <tt>&lt;linux/fs.h&gt;</tt>.
 Instead, there was a set of file system–specific header files that 
defined file system-specific constant names, all with the same value. 
Thus, <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span> had <tt>EXT2_APPEND_FL</tt>, defined in <tt>&lt;linux/ext2_fs.h&gt;</tt>; <span class="docEmphasis">Reiserfs</span> had <tt>REISERFS_APPEND_FL</tt>, defined with the same value in <tt>&lt;linux/reiser_fs.h&gt;</tt>;
 and so on. Since each of the header files defines the corresponding 
constants with the same value, on older systems that don’t provide the 
definitions in <tt>&lt;linux/fs.h&gt;</tt>, it is possible to include any of the header files and use the file system–specific names.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 15-6. I-node flags</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Constant</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom"><span class="docEmphasis">chattr</span> option</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Purpose</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>FS_APPEND_FL</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Append only (privilege required)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>FS_COMPR_FL</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>c</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Enable file compression (not implemented)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>FS_DIRSYNC_FL</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>D</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Synchronous directory updates (since Linux 2.6)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>FS_IMMUTABLE_FL</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>i</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Immutable (privilege required)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>FS_JOURNAL_DATA_FL</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>j</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Enable data journaling (privilege required)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>FS_NOATIME_FL</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>A</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Don’t update file last access time</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>FS_NODUMP_FL</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>d</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No dump</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>FS_NOTAIL_FL</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>t</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No tail packing</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>FS_SECRM_FL</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>s</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Secure deletion (not implemented)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>FS_SYNC_FL</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>S</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Synchronous file (and directory) updates</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>FS_TOPDIR_FL</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>T</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Treat as top-level directory for Orlov (since Linux 2.6)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>FS_UNRM_FL</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>u</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">File can be undeleted (not implemented)</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">The various <tt>FL_*</tt> flags and their meanings are as follows:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FS_APPEND_FL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The file can be opened for writing only if the <tt>O_APPEND</tt>
 flag is specified (thus forcing all file updates to append to the end 
of the file). This flag could be used for a log file, for example. Only 
privileged (<tt>CAP_LINUX_IMMUTABLE</tt>) processes can set this flag.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FS_COMPR_FL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Store
 the file on disk in a compressed format. This feature is not 
implemented as a standard part of any of the major native Linux file 
systems. (There are packages that implement this feature for <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ext3</span>.)
 Given the low cost of disk storage, the CPU overhead involved in 
compression and decompression, and the fact that compressing a file 
means that it is no longer a simple matter to randomly access the file’s
 contents (via <span class="docEmphasis">lseek()</span>), file compression is undesirable for many applications.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FS_DIRSYNC_FL</span></span> (since Linux 2.6)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Make directory updates (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">open(pathname, O_CREAT)</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">link()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">unlink()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">mkdir()</span>)
 synchronous. This is analogous to the synchronous file update mechanism
 described in Section 13.3. As with synchronous file updates, there is a
 performance impact associated with synchronous directory updates. This 
setting can be applied only to directories. (The <tt>MS_DIRSYNC</tt> mount flag described in Section 14.8.1 provides similar functionality, but on a per-mount basis.)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FS_IMMUTABLE_FL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Make the file immutable. File data can’t be updated (<span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">truncate()</span>) and metadata changes are prevented (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">chmod()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">chown()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">unlink()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">link()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">rename()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">rmdir()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">utime()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">setxattr()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">removexattr()</span>). Only privileged (<tt>CAP_LINUX_IMMUTABLE</tt>)
 processes can set this flag for a file. When this flag is set, even a 
privileged process can’t change the file contents or metadata.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FS_JOURNAL_DATA_FL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Enable journaling of data. This flag is supported only on the <span class="docEmphasis">ext3</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ext4</span> file systems. These file systems provide three levels of journaling: <span class="docEmphasis">journal</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ordered</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">writeback</span>. All modes journal updates to file metadata, but the <span class="docEmphasis">journal</span> mode additionally journals updates to file data. On a file system that is journaling in <span class="docEmphasis">ordered</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">writeback</span> mode, a privileged <tt>(CAP_SYS_RESOURCE)</tt> process can enable journaling of data updates on a per-file basis by setting this flag. (The <span class="docEmphasis">mount(8)</span> manual page describes the difference between the <span class="docEmphasis">ordered</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">writeback</span> modes.)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FS_NOATIME_FL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Don’t
 update the file last access time when the file is accessed. This 
eliminates the need to update the file’s i-node each time the file is 
accessed, thus improving I/O performance (see the description of the <tt>MS_NOATIME</tt> flag in Section 14.8.1).</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FS_NODUMP_FL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Don’t include this file in backups made using <span class="docEmphasis">dump(8)</span>. The effect of this flag is dependent on the <span class="docEmphasis">-h</span> option described in the <span class="docEmphasis">dump(8)</span> manual page.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FS_NOTAIL_FL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Disable tail packing. This flag is supported only on the <span class="docEmphasis">Reiserfs</span> file system. It disables the <span class="docEmphasis">Reiserfs</span>
 tail-packing feature, which tries to pack small files (and the final 
fragment of larger files) into the same disk block as the file metadata.
 Tail packing can also be disabled for an entire <span class="docEmphasis">Reiserfs</span> file system by mounting it with the <span class="docEmphasis">mount -o notail</span> option.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FS_SECRM_FL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Delete
 the file securely. The intended purpose of this unimplemented feature 
is that, when removed, a file is securely deleted, meaning that it is 
first overwritten to prevent a disk-scanning program from reading or 
re-creating it. (The issue of truly secure deletion is rather complex: 
it can actually require multiple writes on magnetic media to securely 
erase previously recorded data; see [Gutmann, 1996].)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FS_SYNC_FL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Make file updates synchronous. When applied to files, this flag causes writes to the file to be synchronous (as though the <tt>O_SYNC</tt>
 flag was specified on all opens of this file). When applied to a 
directory, this flag has the same effect as the synchronous directory 
updates flag described above.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FS_TOPDIR_FL</span></span> (since Linux 2.6)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This marks a directory for special treatment under the <span class="docEmphasis">Orlov</span> block-allocation strategy. The Orlov strategy is a BSD-inspired modification of the <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span>
 block-allocation strategy that tries to improve the chances that 
related files (e.g., the files within a single directory) are placed 
close to each other on disk, which can improve disk seek times. For 
details, see [Corbet, 2002] and [Kumar, et al. 2008]. <tt>FS_TOPDIR_FL</tt> has an effect only for <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span> and its descendants, <span class="docEmphasis">ext3</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ext4</span>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FS_UNRM_FL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Allow
 this file to be recovered (undeleted) if it is deleted. This feature is
 not implemented, since it is possible to implement file-recovery 
mechanisms outside the kernel.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">Generally,
 when i-node flags are set on a directory, they are automatically 
inherited by new files and subdirectories created in that directory. 
There are exceptions to this rule:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <tt>FS_DIRSYNC_FL</tt> (<span class="docEmphasis">chattr +D</span>) flag, which can be applied only to a directory, is inherited only by subdirectories created in that directory.</p></li><li><p class="docList">When the <tt>FS_IMMUTABLE_FL</tt> (<span class="docEmphasis">chattr +i</span>)
 flag is applied to a directory, it is not inherited by files and 
subdirectories created within that directory, since this flag prevents 
new entries being added to the directory.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Within a program, i-node flags can be retrieved and modified using the <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> <tt>FS_IOC_GETFLAGS</tt> and <tt>FS_IOC_SETFLAGS</tt> operations. (These constants are defined in <tt>&lt;linux/fs.h&gt;</tt>.) The following code shows how to enable the <tt>FS_NOATIME_FL</tt> flag on the file referred to by the open file descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>:</p><pre>int attr;

if (ioctl(fd, FS_IOC_GETFLAGS, &amp;attr) == -1)    /* Fetch current flags */
    errExit("ioctl");
attr |= FS_NOATIME_FL;
if (ioctl(fd, FS_IOC_SETFLAGS, &amp;attr) == -1)    /* Update flags */
    errExit("ioctl");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In order to change the i-node 
flags of a file, either the effective user ID of the process must match 
the user ID (owner) of the file, or the process must be privileged (<tt>CAP_FOWNER</tt>).
 (To be strictly accurate, on Linux, for an unprivileged process it is 
the process’s file-system user ID, rather than its effective user ID, 
that must match the user ID of the file, as described in Section 9.5.)</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
