<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>15.6. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">15.6. Summary</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">stat()</span>
 system call retrieves information about a file (metadata), most of 
which is drawn from the file i-node. This information includes file 
ownership, file permissions, and file timestamps.</p><p class="docText">A program can update a file’s last access time and last modification time using <span class="docEmphasis">utime()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">utimes()</span>, and various similar interfaces.</p><p class="docText">Each
 file has an associated user ID (owner) and group ID, as well as a set 
of permission bits. For permissions purposes, file users are divided 
into three categories: <span class="docEmphasis">owner</span> (also known as <span class="docEmphasis">user</span>), <span class="docEmphasis">group</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">other</span>. Three permissions may be granted to each category of user: <span class="docEmphasis">read</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">write</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">execute</span>. The same scheme is used with directories, although the permission bits have slightly different meanings. The <span class="docEmphasis">chown()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">chmod()</span> system calls change the ownership and permissions of a file. The <span class="docEmphasis">umask()</span> system call sets a mask of permission bits that are always turned off when the calling process creates a file.</p><p class="docText">Three
 additional permission bits are used for files and directories. The 
set-user-ID and set-group-ID permission bits can be applied to program 
files to create programs that cause the executing process to gain 
privilege by assuming a different effective user or group identity (that
 of the program file). For directories residing on file systems mounted 
using the <span class="docEmphasis">nogrpid</span> (<span class="docEmphasis">sysvgroups</span>)
 option, the set-group-ID permission bit can be used to control whether 
new files created in the directory inherit their group ID from the 
process’s effective group ID or from the parent directory’s group ID. 
When applied to directories, the sticky permission bit acts as the 
restricted deletion flag.</p><p class="docText">I-node flags control the various behaviors of files and directories. Although originally defined for <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span>, these flags are now supported on several other file systems.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
