<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>15.7. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">15.7. Exercises</h3><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Section 15.4
 contained several statements about the permissions required for various
 file-system operations. Use shell commands or write programs to verify 
or answer the following:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Removing all owner permissions from a file denies the file owner access, even though group and other do have access.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">On
 a directory with read permission but not execute permission, the names 
of files in the directory can be listed, but the files themselves can’t 
be accessed, regardless of the permissions on them.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">What
 permissions are required on the parent directory and the file itself in
 order to create a new file, open a file for reading, open a file for 
writing, and delete a file? What permissions are required on the source 
and target directory to rename a file? If the target file of a rename 
operation already exists, what permissions are required on that file? 
How does setting the sticky permission bit (<span class="docEmphasis">chmod +t</span>) of a directory affect renaming and deletion operations?</p></div></li></ol></div></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Do you expect any of a file’s three timestamps to be changed by the <span class="docEmphasis">stat()</span> system call? If not, explain why.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">On a system running Linux 2.6, modify the program in Example 15-1 (<tt>t_stat.c</tt>) so that the file timestamps are displayed with nanosecond accuracy.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">access()</span>
 system call checks permissions using the process’s real user and group 
IDs. Write a corresponding function that performs the checks according 
to the process’s effective user and group IDs.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">As noted in Section 15.4.6, <span class="docEmphasis">umask()</span>
 always sets the process umask and, at the same time, returns a copy of 
the old umask. How can we obtain a copy of the current process umask 
while leaving it unchanged?</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">chmod a+rX file</span>
 command enables read permission for all categories of user, and 
likewise enables execute permission for all categories of user if <span class="docEmphasis">file</span> is a directory or execute permission is enabled for any of the user categories for <span class="docEmphasis">file</span>, as demonstrated in the following example:</p><pre>$ <b>ls -ld dir file prog</b>
dr--------  2 mtk users    48 May  4 12:28 dir
-r--------  1 mtk users 19794 May  4 12:22 file
-r-x------  1 mtk users 19336 May  4 12:21 prog
$ <b>chmod a+rX dir file prog</b>
$ <b>ls -ld dir file prog</b>
dr-xr-xr-x  2 mtk users    48 May  4 12:28 dir
-r--r--r--  1 mtk users 19794 May  4 12:22 file
-r-xr-xr-x  1 mtk users 19336 May  4 12:21 prog</pre><br/>
<p class="docList">Write a program that uses <span class="docEmphasis">stat()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">chmod()</span> to perform the equivalent of <span class="docEmphasis">chmod a+rX</span>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write a simple version of the <span class="docEmphasis">chattr(1)</span> command, which modifies file i-node flags. See the <span class="docEmphasis">chattr(1)</span> man page for details of the <span class="docEmphasis">chattr</span> command-line interface. (You don’t need to implement the <span class="docEmphasis">-R</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">-V</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">-v</span> options.)</p></div></li></ol></div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
