<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>16.1. Overview</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">16.1. Overview</h3><p class="docText">EAs are used to implement access control lists (Chapter 17) and file capabilities (Chapter 39).
 However, the design of EAs is general enough to allow them to be used 
for other purposes as well. For example, EAs could be used to record a 
file version number, information about the MIME type or character set 
for the file, or (a pointer to) a graphical icon.</p><p class="docText">EAs
 are not specified in SUSv3. However, a similar feature is provided on a
 few other UNIX implementations, notably the modern BSDs (see <span class="docEmphasis">extattr(2)</span>) and Solaris 9 and later (see <span class="docEmphasis">fsattr(5)</span>).</p><p class="docText">EAs require support from the underlying file system. This support is provided in <span class="docEmphasis">Btrfs</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ext3</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ext4</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">JFS</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">Reiserfs</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">XFS</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Support for EAs is optional for each file system, and is controlled by kernel configuration options under the <span class="docEmphasis">File systems</span> menu. EAs are supported on <span class="docEmphasis">Reiserfs</span> since Linux 2.6.7.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6UCI">16.1.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EDVCI">16.1.1.1. EA namespaces</h5><p class="docText">EAs have names of the form <span class="docEmphasis">namespace.name</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">namespace</span> component serves to separate EAs into functionally distinct classes. The <span class="docEmphasis">name</span> component uniquely identifies an EA within the given <span class="docEmphasis">namespace</span>.</p><p class="docText">Four values are supported for <span class="docEmphasis">namespace</span>: <span class="docEmphasis">user</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">trusted</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">system</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">security</span>. These four types of EAs are used as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">User</span> EAs may be manipulated by unprivileged processes, subject to file permission checks: to retrieve the value of a <span class="docEmphasis">user</span> EA requires read permission on the file; to change the value of a <span class="docEmphasis">user</span> EA requires write permission. (Lack of the required permission results in an <tt>EACCES</tt> error.) In order to associate <span class="docEmphasis">user</span> EAs with a file on <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ext3</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ext4</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">Reiserfs</span> file systems, the underlying file system must be mounted with the <span class="docEmphasis">user_xattr</span> option:</p><pre>$ <b>mount -o user_xattr</b> <b><tt><i>device directory</i></tt></b></pre><br/>
</li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Trusted</span> EAs are like <span class="docEmphasis">user</span> EAs in that they can be manipulated by user processes. The difference is that a process must be privileged (<tt>CAP_SYS_ADMIN</tt>) in order to manipulate <span class="docEmphasis">trusted</span> EAs.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">System</span>
 EAs are used by the kernel to associate system objects with a file. 
Currently, the only supported object type is an access control list (Chapter 17).</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Security</span><a name="security labels"></a>
 EAs are used to store file security labels for operating system 
security modules, and to associate capabilities with executable files (Section 39.3.2). <span class="docEmphasis">Security</span> EAs were initially devised to support Security-Enhanced Linux (SELinux, http://www.nsa.gov/research/selinux/).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">An
 i-node may have multiple associated EAs, in the same namespace or in 
different namespaces. The EA names within each namespace are distinct 
sets. In the <span class="docEmphasis">user</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">trusted</span> namespaces, EA names can be arbitrary strings. In the <span class="docEmphasis">system</span> namespace, only names explicitly permitted by the kernel (e.g., those used for access control lists) are allowed.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">JFS</span> supports another namespace, <span class="docEmphasis">os2</span>, that is not implemented in other file systems. The <span class="docEmphasis">os2</span> namespace is provided to support legacy OS/2 file-system EAs. A process doesn’t need to be privileged in order to create <span class="docEmphasis">os2</span> EAs.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E5ZCI">16.1.1.2. Creating and viewing EAs from the shell</h5><p class="docText">From the shell, we can use the <span class="docEmphasis">setfattr(1)</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getfattr(1)</span> commands to set and view the EAs on a file:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth"><b>$ touch tfile </b>
<b>$ setfattr -n user.x -v "The past is not dead." tfile </b>
<b>$ setfattr -n user.y -v "In fact, it's not even past." tfile </b>
<b>$ getfattr -n user.x tfile </b>          <i> Retrieve value of a single EA</i>
# file: tfile                       <i> Informational message from getfattr</i>
user.x="The past is not dead."      <i> The getfattr command prints a blank</i>
                                    <i> line after each file’s attributes</i>
$ getfattr -d tfile                 <i> Dump values of all user EAs</i>
# file: tfile
user.x="The past is not dead."
user.y="In fact, it's not even past."

<b>$ setfattr -n user.x tfile </b>          <i> Change value of EA to be an empty string</i>
<b>$ getfattr -d tfile </b>
# file: tfile
user.x
user.y="In fact, it's not even past."

<b>$ setfattr -x user.y tfile </b>          <i> Remove an EA</i>
<b>$ getfattr -d tfile </b>
# file: tfile
user.x

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">One of the points that 
the preceding shell session demonstrates is that the value of an EA may 
be an empty string, which is not the same as an EA that is undefined. 
(At the end of the shell session, the value of <span class="docEmphasis">user.x</span> is an empty string and <span class="docEmphasis">user.y</span> is undefined.)</p><p class="docText">By default, <span class="docEmphasis">getfattr</span> lists only the values of <span class="docEmphasis">user</span> EAs. The <span class="docEmphasis">-m</span> option can be used to specify a regular expression pattern that selects the EA names that are to be displayed:</p><pre><b>$ getfattr -m '</b><b><tt><i>pattern</i></tt></b><b>'</b> <b><tt><i>file</i></tt></b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The default value for <span class="docEmphasis">pattern</span> is <tt>^user\.</tt>. We can list all EAs on a file using the following command:</p><pre>$ <b>getfattr -m - <tt><i>file</i></tt></b></pre><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
