<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>16.2. Extended Attribute Implementation Details</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">16.2. Extended Attribute Implementation Details</h3><p class="docText">In this section, we extend the overview of the preceding section to fill in a few details of the implementation of EAs.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E2UCI">16.2.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E6UCI">16.2.1.1. Restrictions on <span class="docEmphasis">user</span> extended attributes</h5><p class="docText">It is only possible to place <span class="docEmphasis">user</span> EAs on files and directories. Other file types are excluded for the following reasons:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">For
 a symbolic link, all permissions are enabled for all users, and these 
permissions can’t be changed. (Symbolic link permissions have no meaning
 on Linux, as detailed in Section 18.2.) This means that permissions 
can’t be used to prevent arbitrary users from placing <span class="docEmphasis">user</span> EAs on a symbolic link. The resolution of this problem is to prevent all users from creating <span class="docEmphasis">user</span> EAs on the symbolic link.</p></li><li><p class="docList">For
 device files, sockets, and FIFOs, the permissions control the access 
that users are granted for the purpose of performing I/O on the 
underlying object. Manipulating these permissions to control the 
creation of <span class="docEmphasis">user</span> EAs would conflict with this purpose.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Furthermore, it is not possible for an unprivileged process to place a <span class="docEmphasis">user</span> EA on a directory owned by another user if the sticky bit (Section 15.4.5) is set on the directory. This prevents arbitrary users from attaching EAs to directories such as <tt>/tmp</tt>,
 which are publicly writable (and so would allow arbitrary users to 
manipulate EAs on the directory), but which have the sticky bit set to 
prevent users from deleting files owned by other users in the directory.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EDWCI">16.2.1.2. Implementation limits</h5><p class="docText">The Linux VFS imposes the following limits on EAs on all file systems:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The length of an EA name is limited to 255 characters.</p></li><li><p class="docList">An EA value is limited to 64 kB.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">In addition, some file systems impose more restrictive limits on the size and number of EAs that can be associated with a file:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">On <span class="docEmphasis">ext2, ext3</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">ext4</span>, the total bytes used by the names and values of all EAs on a file is limited to the size of a single logical disk block (Section 14.3): 1024, 2048, or 4096 bytes.</p></li><li><p class="docList">On <span class="docEmphasis">JFS</span>, there is an upper limit of 128 kB on the total bytes used by the names and values of all EAs on a file.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
