<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>16.3. System Calls for Manipulating Extended Attributes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">16.3. System Calls for Manipulating Extended Attributes</h3><p class="docText">In this section, we look at the system calls used to update, retrieve, and remove EAs.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENVCI">16.3.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ERVCI">16.3.1.1. Creating and modifying EAs</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">setxattr(), lsetxattr()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">fsetxattr()</span> system calls set the value of one of a file’s EAs.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/xattr.h&gt;

int <b>setxattr</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">name</span>, const void *<span class="docEmphasis">value</span>,
              size_t <span class="docEmphasis">size</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">f lags</span>);
int <b>lsetxattr</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">name</span>, const void *<span class="docEmphasis">value</span>,
              size_t <span class="docEmphasis">size</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">f lags</span>);
int <b>fsetxattr</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">name</span>, const void *<span class="docEmphasis">value</span>,
              size_t <span class="docEmphasis">size</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">f lags</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">All return 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The differences between these three calls are analogous to those between <span class="docEmphasis">stat()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">lstat()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">fstat()</span> (Section 15.1):</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">setxattr()</span> identifies a file by <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, and dereferences the filename if it is a symbolic link;</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">lsetxattr()</span> identifies a file by <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, but doesn’t dereference symbolic links; and</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">fsetxattr()</span> identifies a file by the open file descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The same distinction applies to the other groups of system calls described in the remainder of this section.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">name</span> argument is a null-terminated string that defines the name of the EA. The <span class="docEmphasis">value</span> argument is a pointer to a buffer that defines the new value for the EA. The <span class="docEmphasis">size</span> argument specifies the length of this buffer.</p><p class="docText">By default, these system calls create a new EA if one with the given <span class="docEmphasis">name</span> doesn’t already exist, or replace the value of an EA if it does already exist. The <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>
 argument provides finer control over this behavior. It may be specified
 as 0 to obtain the default behavior, or as one of the following 
constants:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">XATTR_CREATE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Fail (<tt>EEXIST</tt>) if an EA with the given <span class="docEmphasis">name</span> already exists.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">XATTR_REPLACE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Fail (<tt>ENODATA</tt>) if an EA with the given <span class="docEmphasis">name</span> doesn’t already exist.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">Here is an example of the use of <span class="docEmphasis">setxattr()</span> to create a <span class="docEmphasis">user</span> EA:</p><pre>char *value;

value = "The past is not dead.";

if (setxattr(pathname, "user.x", value, strlen(value), 0) == -1)
    errExit("setxattr");</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EK1CI">16.3.1.2. Retrieving the value of an EA</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getxattr()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">lgetxattr()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">fgetxattr()</span> system calls retrieve the value of an EA.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/xattr.h&gt;

ssize_t <b>getxattr</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">name</span>, void *<span class="docEmphasis">value</span>,
                  size_t <span class="docEmphasis">size</span>);
ssize_t <b>lgetxattr</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">name</span>, void *<span class="docEmphasis">value</span>,
                  size_t <span class="docEmphasis">size</span>);
ssize_t <b>fgetxattr</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">name</span>, void *<span class="docEmphasis">value</span>,
                  size_t <span class="docEmphasis">size</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">All return (nonnegative) size of EA value on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">name</span>
 argument is a null-terminated string that identifies the EA whose value
 we want to retrieve. The EA value is returned in the buffer pointed to 
by <span class="docEmphasis">value</span>. This buffer must be allocated by the caller, and its length must be specified in <span class="docEmphasis">size</span>. On success, these system calls return the number of bytes copied into <span class="docEmphasis">value</span>.</p><p class="docText">If the file doesn’t have an attribute with the given <span class="docEmphasis">name</span>, these system calls fail with the error <tt>ENODATA</tt>. If <span class="docEmphasis">size</span> is too small, these system calls fail with the error <tt>ERANGE</tt>.</p><p class="docText">It is possible to specify <span class="docEmphasis">size</span> as 0, in which case <span class="docEmphasis">value</span> is ignored but the system call still returns the size of the EA value. This provides a mechanism to determine the size of the <span class="docEmphasis">value</span>
 buffer required for a subsequent call to actually retrieve the EA 
value. Note, however, that we still have no guarantee that the returned 
size will be big enough when subsequently trying to retrieve the value. 
Another process may have assigned a bigger value to the attribute in the
 meantime, or removed the attribute altogether.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EQ6CI">16.3.1.3. Removing an EA</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">removexattr()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">lremovexattr()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">fremovexattr()</span> system calls remove an EA from a file.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/xattr.h&gt;

int <b>removexattr</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">name</span>);
int <b>lremovexattr</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">name</span>);
int <b>fremovexattr</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">name</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">All return 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The null-terminated string given in <span class="docEmphasis">name</span> identifies the EA that is to be removed. An attempt to remove an EA that doesn’t exist fails with the error <tt>ENODATA</tt>.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EPBDI">16.3.1.4. Retrieving the names of all EAs associated with a file</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">listxattr()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">llistxattr()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">flistxattr()</span> system calls return a list containing the names of all of the EAs associated with a file.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/xattr.h&gt;

ssize_t <b>listxattr</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, char *<span class="docEmphasis">list</span>, size_t <span class="docEmphasis">size</span>);
ssize_t <b>llistxattr</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, char *<span class="docEmphasis">list</span>, size_t <span class="docEmphasis">size</span>);
ssize_t <b>flistxattr</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, char *<span class="docEmphasis">list</span>, size_t <span class="docEmphasis">size</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">All return number of bytes copied into list on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The list of EA names is returned as a series of null-terminated strings in the buffer pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">list</span>. The size of this buffer must be specified in <span class="docEmphasis">size</span>. On success, these system calls return the number of bytes copied into <span class="docEmphasis">list</span>.</p><p class="docText">As with <span class="docEmphasis">getxattr()</span>, it is possible to specify <span class="docEmphasis">size</span> as 0, in which case <span class="docEmphasis">list</span>
 is ignored, but the system call returns the size of the buffer that 
would be required for a subsequent call to actually retrieve the EA name
 list (assuming it remains unchanged).</p><p class="docText">To
 retrieve a list of the EA names associated with a file requires only 
that the file be accessible (i.e., that we have execute access to all of
 the directories included in <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>). No permissions are required on the file itself.</p><p class="docText">For security reasons, the EA names returned in <span class="docEmphasis">list</span> may exclude attributes to which the calling process doesn’t have access. For example, most file systems omit <span class="docEmphasis">trusted</span> attributes from the list returned by a call to <span class="docEmphasis">listxattr()</span>
 in an unprivileged process. But note the “may” in the earlier sentence,
 indicating that a file-system implementation is not obliged to do this.
 Therefore, we need to allow for the possibility that a subsequent call 
to <span class="docEmphasis">getxattr()</span> using an EA name returned in <span class="docEmphasis">list</span>
 may fail because the process doesn’t have the privilege required to 
obtain the value of that EA. (A similar failure could also happen if 
another process deleted an attribute between the calls to <span class="docEmphasis">listxattr()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getxattr()</span>.)</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EUGDI">16.3.1.5. Example program</h5><p class="docText">The program in Example 16-1
 retrieves and displays the names and values of all EAs of the files 
listed on its command line. For each file, the program uses <span class="docEmphasis">listxattr()</span> to retrieve the names of all EAs associated with the file, and then executes a loop calling <span class="docEmphasis">getxattr()</span> once for each name, to retrieve the corresponding value. By default, attribute values are displayed as plain text. If the <span class="docEmphasis">-x</span>
 option is supplied, then the attribute values are displayed as 
hexadecimal strings. The following shell session log demonstrates the 
use of this program:</p><pre><b>$ setfattr -n user.x -v "The past is not dead." tfile</b>
<b>$ setfattr -n user.y -v "In fact, it's not even past." tfile</b>
<b>$ ./xattr_view tfile</b>
tfile:
        name=user.x; value=The past is not dead.
        name=user.y; value=In fact, it's not even past.</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EWHDI">Example 16-1. Display file extended attributes</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>xattr/xattr_view.c</b>
#include &lt;sys/xattr.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

#define XATTR_SIZE 10000

static void
usageError(char *progName)
{
    fprintf(stderr, "Usage: %s [-x] file...\n", progName);
    exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    char list[XATTR_SIZE], value[XATTR_SIZE];
    ssize_t listLen, valueLen;
    int ns, j, k, opt;
    Boolean hexDisplay;

    hexDisplay = 0;
    while ((opt = getopt(argc, argv, "x")) != -1) {
        switch (opt) {
        case 'x': hexDisplay = 1;       break;
        case '?': usageError(argv[0]);
        }
    }

    if (optind &gt;= argc + 2)
        usageError(argv[0]);
    for (j = optind; j &lt; argc; j++) {
        listLen = listxattr(argv[j], list, XATTR_SIZE);
        if (listLen == -1)
            errExit("listxattr");

        printf("%s:\n", argv[j]);

        /* Loop through all EA names, displaying name + value */

        for (ns = 0; ns &lt; listLen; ns += strlen(&amp;list[ns]) + 1) {
            printf("        name=%s; ", &amp;list[ns]);

            valueLen = getxattr(argv[j], &amp;list[ns], value, XATTR_SIZE);
            if (valueLen == -1) {
                printf("couldn't get value");
            } else if (!hexDisplay) {
                printf("value=%.*s", (int) valueLen, value);
            } else {
                printf("value=");
                for (k = 0; k &lt; valueLen; k++)
                    printf("%02x ", (unsigned int) value[k]);
            }

            printf("\n");
        }

        printf("\n");
    }

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
      <b>xattr/xattr_view.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
