<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 17. Access Control Lists</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0EHYCI">Chapter 17. Access Control Lists</h2><p class="docText">Section 15.4
 described the traditional UNIX (and Linux) file permissions scheme. For
 many applications, this scheme is sufficient. However, some 
applications need finer control over the permissions granted to specific
 users and groups. To meet this requirement, many UNIX systems implement
 an extension to the traditional UNIX file permissions model known as <span class="docEmphasis">access control lists</span>
 (ACLs). ACLs allow file permissions to be specified per user or per 
group, for an arbitrary number of users and groups. Linux provides ACLs 
from kernel 2.6 onward.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Support for ACLs is optional for each file system, and is controlled by kernel configuration options under the <span class="docEmphasis">File systems</span> menu. <span class="docEmphasis">Reiserfs</span> support for ACLs has been available since kernel 2.6.7.</p><p class="docText">In order to be able to create ACLs on an <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ext3</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ext4</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">Reiserfs</span> file system, the file system must be mounted with the <span class="docEmphasis">mount -o acl</span> option.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">ACLs
 have never been formally standardized for UNIX systems. An attempt was 
made to do this in the form of the POSIX.1e and POSIX.2c draft 
standards, which aimed to specify, respectively, the application program
 interface (API) and the shell commands for ACLs (as well as other 
features, such as capabilities). Ultimately, this standardization 
attempt foundered, and these draft standards were withdrawn. 
Nevertheless, many UNIX implementations (including Linux) base their ACL
 implementations on these draft standards (usually on the final version,
 <span class="docEmphasis">Draft 17</span>).
 However, because there are many variations across ACL implementations 
(in part springing from the incompleteness of the draft standards), 
writing portable programs that use ACLs presents some difficulties.</p><p class="docText">This
 chapter provides a description of ACLs and a brief tutorial on their 
use. It also describes some of the library functions used for 
manipulating and retrieving ACLs. We won’t go into detail on all of 
these functions because there are so many of them. (For the details, see
 the manual pages.)</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
