<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>17.2. ACL Permission-Checking Algorithm</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">17.2. ACL Permission-Checking Algorithm</h3><p class="docText">Permission
 checking on a file that has an ACL is performed in the same 
circumstances as for the traditional file permissions model (Section 15.4.3). Checks are performed in the following order, until one of the criteria is matched:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If
 the process is privileged, all access is granted. There is one 
exception to this statement, analogous to the traditional permissions 
model described in Section 15.4.3.
 When executing a file, a privileged process is granted execute 
permission only if that permission is granted via at least one of the 
ACL entries on the file.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If
 the effective user ID of the process matches the owner (user ID) of the
 file, then the process is granted the permissions specified in the <tt>ACL_USER_OBJ</tt>
 entry. (To be strictly accurate, on Linux, it is the process’s 
file-system IDs, rather than its effective IDs, that are used for the 
checks described in this section, as described in Section 9.5.)</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If the effective user ID of the process matches the tag qualifier in one of the <tt>ACL_USER</tt> entries, then the process is granted the permissions specified in that entry, masked (ANDed) against the value of the <tt>ACL_MASK</tt> entry.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If
 one of the process’s group IDs (i.e., the effective group ID or any of 
the supplementary group IDs) matches the file group (this corresponds to
 the <tt>ACL_GROUP_OBJ</tt> entry) or the tag qualifier of any of the <tt>ACL_GROUP</tt> entries, then access is determined by checking each of the following, until a match is found:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If one of the process’s group IDs matches the file group, and the <tt>ACL_GROUP_OBJ</tt>
 entry grants the requested permissions, then this entry determines the 
access granted to the file. The granted access is restricted by masking 
(ANDing) against the value in the <tt>ACL_MASK</tt> entry, if present.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If one of the process’s group IDs matches the tag qualifier in an <tt>ACL_GROUP</tt>
 entry for the file, and that entry grants the requested permissions, 
then this entry determines the permissions granted. The granted access 
is restricted by masking (ANDing) against the value in the <tt>ACL_MASK</tt> entry.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Otherwise, access is denied.</p></div></li></ol></div></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Otherwise, the process is granted the permissions specified in the <tt>ACL_OTHER</tt> entry.</p></div></li></ol></div><p class="docText">We
 can clarify the rules relating to group IDs with some examples. Suppose
 we have a file whose group ID is 100, and that file is protected by the
 ACL shown in Figure 17-1. If a process whose group ID is 100 makes the call <span class="docEmphasis">access(file, R_OK)</span>, then that call would succeed (i.e., return 0). (We describe <span class="docEmphasis">access()</span> in Section 15.4.4.) On the other hand, even though the <tt>ACL_GROUP_OBJ</tt> entry grants all permissions, the call <span class="docEmphasis">access(file, R_OK | W_OK | X_OK)</span> would fail (i.e., return -1, with <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> set to <tt>EACCES</tt>) because the <tt>ACL_GROUP_OBJ</tt> permissions are masked (ANDed) against the <tt>ACL_MASK</tt> entry, and this entry denies execute permission.</p><p class="docText">As another example using Figure 17-1,
 suppose we have a process that has a group ID of 102 and that also 
contains the group ID 103 in its supplementary group IDs. For this 
process, the calls <span class="docEmphasis">access</span>(<span class="docEmphasis">file</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">R</span>_<span class="docEmphasis">OK</span>) and <span class="docEmphasis">access</span>(<span class="docEmphasis">file</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">W</span>_<span class="docEmphasis">OK</span>) would both succeed, since they would match the <tt>ACL_GROUP</tt> entries for the group IDs 102 and 103, respectively. On the other hand, the call <span class="docEmphasis">access</span>(<span class="docEmphasis">file</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">R</span>_<span class="docEmphasis">OK</span> | <span class="docEmphasis">W</span>_<span class="docEmphasis">OK</span>) would fail because there is no matching <tt>ACL_GROUP</tt> entry that grants both read and write permissions.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
