<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>17.4. The ACL_MASK Entry and the ACL Group Class</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">17.4. The <tt>ACL_MASK</tt> Entry and the ACL Group Class</h3><p class="docText">If an ACL contains <tt>ACL_USER</tt> or <tt>ACL_GROUP</tt> entries, then it must contain an <tt>ACL_MASK</tt> entry. If the ACL doesn’t contain any <tt>ACL_USER</tt> or <tt>ACL_GROUP</tt> entries, then the <tt>ACL_MASK</tt> entry is optional.</p><p class="docText">The <tt>ACL_MASK</tt> entry acts as an upper limit on the permissions granted by ACL entries in the so-called <span class="docEmphasis">group class</span>. The group class is the set of all <tt>ACL_USER</tt>, <tt>ACL_GROUP</tt>, and <tt>ACL_GROUP_OBJ</tt> entries in the ACL.</p><p class="docText">The purpose of the <tt>ACL_MASK</tt>
 entry is to provide consistent behavior when running ACL-unaware 
applications. As an example of why the mask entry is needed, suppose 
that the ACL on a file includes the following entries:</p><pre>user::rwx                       # ACL_USER_OBJ
user:paulh:r-x                  # ACL_USER
group::r-x                      # ACL_GROUP_OBJ
group:teach:--x                 # ACL_GROUP
other::--x                      # ACL_OTHER</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Now suppose that a program executes the following <span class="docEmphasis">chmod()</span> call on this file:</p><pre>chmod(pathname, 0700);      /* Set permissions to rwx------ */</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In an ACL-unaware application,
 this means “Deny access to everyone except the file owner.” These 
semantics should hold even in the presence of ACLs. In the absence of an
 <tt>ACL_MASK</tt> entry, this behavior could be implemented in various ways, but there are problems with each approach:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Simply modifying the <tt>ACL_GROUP_OBJ</tt> and <tt>ACL_USER_OBJ</tt> entries to have the mask <tt>---</tt> would be insufficient, since the user <span class="docEmphasis">paulh</span> and the group <span class="docEmphasis">teach</span> would still have some permissions on the file.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Another
 possibility would be to apply the new group and other permission 
settings (i.e., all permissions disabled) to all of the <tt>ACL_USER</tt>, <tt>ACL_GROUP</tt>, <tt>ACL_GROUP_OBJ</tt>, and <tt>ACL_OTHER</tt> entries in the ACL:</p><pre>user::rwx                       # ACL_USER_OBJ
user:paulh:---                  # ACL_USER
group::---                      # ACL_GROUP_OBJ
group:teach:---                 # ACL_GROUP
other::---                      # ACL_OTHER</pre><br/>
<p class="docList">The problem with this 
approach is that the ACL-unaware application would thereby inadvertently
 destroy the file permission semantics established by ACL-aware 
applications, since the following call (for example) would not restore 
the <tt>ACL_USER</tt> and <tt>ACL_GROUP</tt> entries of the ACL to their former states:</p><pre>chmod(pathname, 751);</pre><br/>
</li><li><p class="docList">To avoid these problems, we might consider making the <tt>ACL_GROUP_OBJ</tt> entry the limiting set for all <tt>ACL_USER</tt> and <tt>ACL_GROUP</tt> entries. However, this would mean that the <tt>ACL_GROUP_OBJ</tt> permissions would always need to be set to the union of all permissions allowed in all <tt>ACL_USER</tt> and <tt>ACL_GROUP</tt> entries. This would conflict with the use of the <tt>ACL_GROUP_OBJ</tt> entry for determining the permissions accorded to the file group.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The <tt>ACL_MASK</tt> entry was devised to solve these problems. It provides a mechanism that allows the traditional meanings of <span class="docEmphasis">chmod()</span>
 operations to be implemented, without destroying the file permission 
semantics established by ACL-aware applications. When an ACL has an <tt>ACL_MASK</tt> entry:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">all changes to traditional group permissions via <span class="docEmphasis">chmod()</span> change the setting of the <tt>ACL_MASK</tt> entry (rather than the <tt>ACL_GROUP_OBJ</tt> entry); and</p></li><li><p class="docList">a call to <span class="docEmphasis">stat()</span> returns the <tt>ACL_MASK</tt> permissions (instead of the <tt>ACL_GROUP_OBJ</tt> permissions) in the group permission bits of the <span class="docEmphasis">st_mode</span> field (Figure 15-1, in Section 15.1.1.1).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">While the <tt>ACL_MASK</tt>
 entry provides a way of preserving ACL information in the face of 
ACL-unaware applications, the reverse is not guaranteed. The presence of
 ACLs overrides the effect of traditional operations on file group 
permissions. For example, suppose that we have placed the following ACL 
on a file:</p><pre>user::rw-,group::---,mask::---,other::r--</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If we then execute the command <span class="docEmphasis">chmod g+rw</span> on this file, the ACL becomes:</p><pre>user::rw-,group::---,mask::rw-,other::r--</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case, group still 
has no access to the file. One workaround for this is to modify the ACL 
entry for group to grant all permissions. Consequently, group will then 
always obtain whatever permissions are granted to the <tt>ACL_MASK</tt> entry.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
