<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>17.5. The getfacl and setfacl Commands</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">17.5. The <span class="docEmphasis">getfacl</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">setfacl</span> Commands</h3><p class="docText">From the shell, we can use the <span class="docEmphasis">getfacl</span> command to view the ACL on a file.</p><pre><b>$ umask 022 </b>                         <i> Set shell umask to known state</i>
$ <b>touch tfile </b>                       <i> Create a new file</i>
$ <b>getfacl tfile </b>
# file: tfile
# owner: mtk
# group: users
user::rw-
group::r--
other::r--</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">From the output of the <span class="docEmphasis">getfacl</span> command, we see that the new file is created with a minimal ACL. When displaying the text form of this ACL, <span class="docEmphasis">getfacl</span>
 precedes the ACL entries with three lines showing the name and 
ownership of the file. We can prevent these lines from being displayed 
by specifying the <span class="docEmphasis">--omit-header</span> option.</p><p class="docText">Next, we demonstrate that changes to a file’s permissions using the traditional <span class="docEmphasis">chmod</span> command are carried through to the ACL.</p><pre><b>$ chmod u=rwx,g=rx,o=x tfile</b>
$ <b>getfacl --omit-header tfile</b>
user::rwx
group::r-x
other::--x</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">setfacl</span> command modifies a file ACL. Here, we use the <span class="docEmphasis">setfacl -m</span> command to add an <tt>ACL_USER</tt> and an <tt>ACL_GROUP</tt> entry to the ACL:</p><pre><b>$ setfacl -m u:paulh:rx,g:teach:x tfile</b>
$ <b>getfacl --omit-header tfile</b>
user::rwx
user:paulh:r-x                      ACL_USER entry
group::r-x
group:teach:--x                     ACL_GROUP entry
mask::r-x                           ACL_MASK entry
other::--x</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">setfacl -m</span>
 option modifies existing ACL entries, or adds new entries if 
corresponding entries with the given tag type and qualifier do not 
already exist. We can additionally use the <span class="docEmphasis">-R</span> option to recursively apply the specified ACL to all of the files in a directory tree.</p><p class="docText">From the output of the <span class="docEmphasis">getfacl</span> command, we can see that <span class="docEmphasis">setfacl</span> automatically created an <tt>ACL_MASK</tt> entry for this ACL.</p><p class="docText">The addition of the <tt>ACL_USER</tt> and <tt>ACL_GROUP</tt> entries converts this ACL into an extended ACL, and <span class="docEmphasis">ls</span> -<span class="docEmphasis">l</span> indicates this fact by appending a plus sign (+) after the traditional file permissions mask:</p><pre>$ <b>ls -l tfile</b>
-rwxr-x--x+   1 mtk      users           0 Dec 3 15:42 tfile</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We continue by using <span class="docEmphasis">setfacl</span> to disable all permissions except execute on the <tt>ACL_MASK</tt> entry, and then view the ACL once more with <span class="docEmphasis">getfacl</span>:</p><pre><b>$ setfacl -m m::x tfile</b>
$ <b>getfacl --omit-header tfile</b>
user::rwx
user:paulh:r-x                  #effective:--x
group::r-x                      #effective:--x
group:teach:--x
mask::--x
other::--x</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>#effective:</tt> comments that <span class="docEmphasis">getfacl</span> prints after the entries for the user <span class="docEmphasis">paulh</span> and the file group (<tt>group::</tt>) inform us that after masking (ANDing) against the <tt>ACL_MASK</tt> entry, the permissions granted by each of these entries will actually be less than those specified in the entry.</p><p class="docText">We then use <span class="docEmphasis">ls -l</span>
 to once more view the traditional permission bits of the file. We see 
that the displayed group class permission bits reflect the permissions 
in the <tt>ACL_MASK</tt> entry (<tt>--x</tt>), rather than those in the <tt>ACL_GROUP</tt> entry (<tt>r-x</tt>):</p><pre>$ ls -l tfile
-rwx--x--x+   1 mtk      users           0 Dec 3 15:42 tfile</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">setfacl -x</span> command can be used to remove entries from an ACL. Here, we remove the entries for the user <span class="docEmphasis">paulh</span> and the group <span class="docEmphasis">teach</span> (no permissions are specified when removing entries):</p><pre><b>$ setfacl -x u:paulh,g:teach tfile</b>
<b>$ getfacl --omit-header tfile</b>
user::rwx
group::r-x
mask::r-x
other::--x</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that during the above operation, <span class="docEmphasis">setfacl</span> automatically adjusted the mask entry to be the union of all of the group class entries. (There was just one such entry: <tt>ACL_GROUP_OBJ</tt>.) If we want to prevent such adjustment, then we must specify the <span class="docEmphasis">-n</span> option to <span class="docEmphasis">setfacl</span>.</p><p class="docText">Finally, we note that the <span class="docEmphasis">setfacl -b</span> option can be used to remove all extended entries from an ACL, leaving just the minimal (i.e., user, group, and other) entries.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
