<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>17.6. Default ACLs and File Creation</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">17.6. Default ACLs and File Creation</h3><p class="docText">In the discussion of ACLs so far, we have been describing <span class="docEmphasis">access</span>
 ACLs. As its name implies, an access ACL is used in determining the 
permissions that a process has when accessing the file associated with 
the ACL. We can create a second type of ACL on directories: a <span class="docEmphasis">default</span> ACL.</p><p class="docText">A
 default ACL plays no part in determining the permissions granted when 
accessing the directory. Instead, its presence or absence determines the
 ACL(s) and permissions that are placed on files and subdirectories that
 are created in the directory. (A default ACL is stored as an extended 
attribute named <span class="docEmphasis">system.posix_acl_default</span>.)</p><p class="docText">To view and set the default ACL of a directory, we use the <span class="docEmphasis">-d</span> option of the <span class="docEmphasis">getfacl</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">setfacl</span> commands.</p><pre class="preFixedWidth"><b>$ mkdir sub </b>
<b>$ setfacl -d -m u::rwx,u:paulh:rx,g::rx,g:teach:rwx,o::- sub </b>
<b>$ getfacl -d --omit-header sub </b>
user::rwx
user:paulh:r-x
group::r-x
group:teach:rwx
mask::rwx                       <i> setfacl generated ACL_MASK entry automatically</i>
other::---

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We can remove a default ACL from a directory using the <span class="docEmphasis">setfacl -k</span> option.</p><p class="docText">If a directory has a default ACL, then:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">A
 new subdirectory created in this directory inherits the directory’s 
default ACL as its default ACL. In other words, default ACLs propagate 
down through a directory tree as new subdirectories are created.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A
 new file or subdirectory created in this directory inherits the 
directory’s default ACL as its access ACL. The ACL entries that 
correspond to the traditional file permission bits are masked (ANDed) 
against the corresponding bits of the <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> argument in the system call (<span class="docEmphasis">open(), mkdir()</span>, and so on) used to create the file or subdirectory. By “corresponding ACL entries,” we mean:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><tt>ACL_USER_OBJ</tt>;</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>ACL_MASK</tt> or, if <tt>ACL_MASK</tt> is absent, then <tt>ACL_GROUP_OBJ</tt>; and</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>ACL_OTHER</tt>.</p></li></ul></li></ul><p class="docText">When a directory has a default ACL, the process umask (Section 15.4.6) doesn’t play a part in determining the permissions in the entries of the access ACL of a new file created in that directory.</p><p class="docText">As an example of how a new file inherits its access ACL from the parent directory’s default ACL, suppose we used the following <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> call to create a new file in the directory created above:</p><pre>open("sub/tfile", O_RDWR | O_CREAT,
        S_IRWXU | S_IXGRP | S_IXOTH);   /* rwx--x--x */</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The new file would have the following access ACL:</p><pre>$ <b>getfacl --omit-header sub/tfile</b>
user::rwx
user:paulh:r-x                  #effective:--x
group::r-x                      #effective:--x
group:teach:rwx                 #effective:--x
mask::--x
other::---</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If a directory doesn’t have a default ACL, then:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">New subdirectories created in this directory also do not have a default ACL.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The permissions of the new file or directory are set following the traditional rules (Section 15.4.6): the file permissions are set to the value in the <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> argument (given to <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">mkdir()</span>, and so on), less the bits that are turned off by the process umask. This results in a minimal ACL on the new file.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
