<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>17.7. ACL Implementation Limits</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">17.7. ACL Implementation Limits</h3><p class="docText">The various file-system implementations impose limits on the number of entries in an ACL:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">On <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ext3</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">ext4</span>,
 the total number of ACLs on a file is governed by the requirement that 
the bytes in all of the names and values of a file’s extended attributes
 must be contained in a single logical disk block (Section 16.2).
 Each ACL entry requires 8 bytes, so that the maximum number of ACL 
entries for a file is somewhat less (because of some overhead for the 
name of the extended attribute for the ACL) than one-eighth of the block
 size. Thus, a 4096-byte block size allows for a maximum of around 500 
ACL entries. (Kernels before 2.6.11 imposed an arbitrary limitation of 
32 entries for ACLs on <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ext3</span>.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">On <span class="docEmphasis">XFS</span>, an ACL is limited to 25 entries.</p></li><li><p class="docList">On <span class="docEmphasis">Reiserfs</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">JFS</span>,
 ACLs can contain up to 8191 entries. This limit is a consequence of the
 size limitation (64 kB) imposed by the VFS on the value of an extended 
attribute (Section 16.2).</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">At the time of writing, <span class="docEmphasis">Btrfs</span> limits ACLs to around 500 entries. However, since <span class="docEmphasis">Btrfs</span> was still under heavy development, this limit may change.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Although
 most of the above file systems allow large numbers of entries to be 
created in an ACL, this should be avoided for the following reasons:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The maintenance of lengthy ACLs becomes a complex and potentially error-prone system administration task.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The
 amount of time required to scan the ACL for the matching entry (or 
matching entries in the case of group ID checks) increases linearly with
 the number of ACL entries.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Generally,
 we can keep the number of ACL entries on a file down to a reasonable 
number by defining suitable groups in the system group file (Section 8.3) and using those groups within the ACL.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
