<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>18.4. Changing the Name of a File: rename()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">18.4. Changing the Name of a File: <span class="docEmphasis">rename()</span></h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">rename()</span> system call can be used both to rename a file and to move it into another directory on the same file system.</p><pre>#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;

int <b>rename</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">oldpath</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">newpath</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">oldpath</span> argument is an existing pathname, which is renamed to the pathname given in <span class="docEmphasis">newpath</span>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">rename()</span>
 call just manipulates directory entries; it doesn’t move file data. 
Renaming a file doesn’t affect other hard links to the file, nor does it
 affect any processes that hold open descriptors for the file, since 
these descriptors refer to open file descriptions, which (after the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> call) have no connection with filenames.</p><p class="docText">The following rules apply to the use of <span class="docEmphasis">rename()</span>:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">If <span class="docEmphasis">newpath</span> already exists, it is overwritten.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If <span class="docEmphasis">newpath</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">oldpath</span>
 refer to the same file, then no changes are made (and the call 
succeeds). This is rather counterintuitive. Following from the previous 
point, we normally expect that if two filenames <tt>x</tt> and <tt>y</tt> exist, then the call <span class="docEmphasis">rename</span> (“x”, “y”) would remove the name <tt>x</tt>. This is not the case if <tt>x</tt> and <tt>y</tt> are links to the same file.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The
 rationale for this rule, which comes from the original BSD 
implementation, was probably to simplify the checks that the kernel must
 perform in order to guarantee that calls such as <span class="docEmphasis">rename(“x”, “x”)</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">rename(“x”, “./x”)</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">rename("x", "somedir/../x")</span> don’t remove the file.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">rename()</span> system call doesn’t dereference symbolic links in either of its arguments. If <span class="docEmphasis">oldpath</span> is a symbolic link, then the symbolic link is renamed. If <span class="docEmphasis">newpath</span> is a symbolic link, then it is treated as a normal pathname to which <span class="docEmphasis">oldpath</span> is to be renamed (i.e., the existing <span class="docEmphasis">newpath</span> symbolic link is removed).</p></li><li><p class="docList">If <span class="docEmphasis">oldpath</span> refers to a file other than a directory, then <span class="docEmphasis">newpath</span> can’t specify the pathname of a directory (the error is <tt>EISDIR</tt>). To rename a file to a location inside a directory (i.e., move the file to another directory), <span class="docEmphasis">newpath</span> must include the new filename. The following call both moves a file into a different directory and changes its name:</p><pre>rename("sub1/x", "sub2/y");</pre><br/>
</li><li><p class="docList">Specifying the name of a directory in <span class="docEmphasis">oldpath</span> allows us to rename that directory. In this case, <span class="docEmphasis">newpath</span> either must not exist or must be the name of an empty directory. If <span class="docEmphasis">newpath</span> is an existing file or an existing, nonempty directory, then an error results (respectively, <tt>ENOTDIR</tt> and <tt>ENOTEMPTY</tt>).</p></li><li><p class="docList">If <span class="docEmphasis">oldpath</span> is a directory, then <span class="docEmphasis">newpath</span> can’t contain a directory prefix that is the same as <span class="docEmphasis">oldpath</span>. For example, we could not rename <tt>/home/mtk</tt> to <tt>/home/mtk/bin</tt> (the error is <tt>EINVAL</tt>).</p></li><li><p class="docList">The files referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">oldpath</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">newpath</span>
 must be on the same file system. This is required because a directory 
is a list of hard links that refer to i-nodes in the same file system as
 the directory. As stated earlier, <span class="docEmphasis">rename()</span>
 is merely manipulating the contents of directory lists. Attempting to 
rename a file into a different file system fails with the error <tt>EXDEV</tt>.
 (To achieve the desired result, we must instead copy the contents of 
the file from one file system to another and then delete the old file. 
This is what the <span class="docEmphasis">mv</span> command does in this case.)</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
