<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>18.5. Working with Symbolic Links: symlink() and readlink()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">18.5. Working with Symbolic Links: <span class="docEmphasis">symlink()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">readlink()</span></h3><p class="docText">We now look at the system calls used to create symbolic links and examine their contents.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">symlink()</span> system call creates a new symbolic link, <span class="docEmphasis">linkpath</span>, to the pathname specified in <span class="docEmphasis">filepath</span>. (To remove a symbolic link, we use <span class="docEmphasis">unlink()</span>.)</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

int <b>symlink</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">filepath</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">linkpath</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If the pathname given in <span class="docEmphasis">linkpath</span> already exists, then the call fails (with <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> set to <tt>EEXIST</tt>). The pathname specified in <span class="docEmphasis">filepath</span> may be absolute or relative.</p><p class="docText">The file or directory named in <span class="docEmphasis">filepath</span>
 doesn’t need to exist at the time of the call. Even if it exists at 
that time, there is nothing to prevent it from being removed later. In 
this case, <span class="docEmphasis">linkpath</span> becomes a <span class="docEmphasis">dangling link</span>, and attempts to dereference it in other system calls yield an error (usually <tt>ENOENT</tt>).</p><p class="docText">If we specify a symbolic link as the <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> argument to <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>,
 it opens the file to which the link refers. Sometimes, we would rather 
retrieve the content of the link itself—that is, the pathname to which 
it refers. The <span class="docEmphasis">readlink()</span> system call performs this task, placing a copy of the symbolic link string in the character array pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">buffer</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

ssize_t <b>readlink</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, char *<span class="docEmphasis">buffer</span>, size_t <span class="docEmphasis">bufsiz</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns number of bytes placed in <span class="docEmphasis">buffer</span> on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">bufsiz</span> argument is an integer used to tell <span class="docEmphasis">readlink()</span> the number of bytes available in <span class="docEmphasis">buffer</span>.</p><p class="docText">If no errors occur, then <span class="docEmphasis">readlink()</span> returns the number of bytes actually placed in <span class="docEmphasis">buffer</span>. If the length of the link exceeds <span class="docEmphasis">bufsiz</span>, then a truncated string is placed in <span class="docEmphasis">buffer</span> (and <span class="docEmphasis">readlink()</span> returns the size of that string—that is, <span class="docEmphasis">bufsiz</span>).</p><p class="docText">Because a terminating null byte is not placed at the end of <span class="docEmphasis">buffer</span>, there is no way to distinguish the case where <span class="docEmphasis">readlink()</span> returns a truncated string from that where it returns a string that exactly fills <span class="docEmphasis">buffer</span>. One way of checking if the latter has occurred is to reallocate a larger <span class="docEmphasis">buffer</span> array and call <span class="docEmphasis">readlink()</span> again. Alternatively, we can size <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> using the <tt>PATH_MAX</tt> constant (described in Section 11.1), which defines the length of the longest pathname that a program should have to accommodate.</p><p class="docText">We demonstrate the use of <span class="docEmphasis">readlink()</span> in Example 18-4.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">SUSv3 defined a new limit, <tt>SYMLINK_MAX</tt>,
 that an implementation should define to indicate the maximum number of 
bytes that can be stored in a symbolic link. This limit is required to 
be at least 255 bytes. At the time of writing, Linux doesn’t define this
 limit. In the main text, we suggest the use of <tt>PATH_MAX</tt> because that limit should be at least as large as <tt>SYMLINK_MAX</tt>.</p><p class="docText">In SUSv2, the return type of <span class="docEmphasis">readlink()</span> was specified as <span class="docEmphasis">int</span>, and many current implementations (as well as older <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> versions on Linux) follow that specification. SUSv3 changed the return type to <span class="docEmphasis">ssize_t</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
