<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>18.6. Creating and Removing Directories: mkdir() and rmdir()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">18.6. Creating and Removing Directories: <span class="docEmphasis">mkdir()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">rmdir()</span></h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mkdir()</span> system call creates a new directory.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/stat.h&gt;

int <b>mkdir</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, mode_t <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>
 argument specifies the pathname of the new directory. This pathname may
 be relative or absolute. If a file with this pathname already exists, 
then the call fails with the error <tt>EEXIST</tt>.</p><p class="docText">The ownership of the new directory is set according to the rules described in Section 15.3.1.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> argument specifies the permissions for the new directory. (We describe the meanings of the permission bits for directories in Section 15.3.1, Section 15.3.2, and Section 15.4.5.) This bit-mask value may be specified by ORing (<tt>|</tt>) together constants from Table 15-4, in Section 15.4.2, but, as with <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>, it may also be specified as an octal number. The value given in <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> is ANDed against the process umask (Section 15.4.6). In addition, the set-user-ID bit (<tt>S_ISUID</tt>) is always turned off, since it has no meaning for directories.</p><p class="docText">If the sticky bit (<tt>S_ISVTX</tt>) is set in <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span>, then it will be set on the new directory.</p><p class="docText">The setting of the set-group-ID bit (<tt>S_ISGID</tt>) in <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span>
 is ignored. Instead, if the set-group-ID bit is set on the parent 
directory, then it will also be set on the newly created directory. In Section 15.3.1,
 we noted that setting the set-group-ID permission bit on a directory 
causes new files created in the directory to take their group ID from 
the directory’s group ID, rather than the process’s effective group ID. 
The <span class="docEmphasis">mkdir()</span> 
system call propagates the set-group-ID permission bit in the manner 
described here so that all subdirectories under a directory will share 
the same behavior.</p><p class="docText">SUSv3 explicitly notes that the manner in which <span class="docEmphasis">mkdir()</span>
 treats the set-user-ID, set-group-ID, and sticky bits is 
implementation-defined. On some UNIX implementations, these 3 bits are 
always turned off on a new directory.</p><p class="docText">The newly created directory contains two entries: <tt>.</tt> (dot), which is a link to the directory itself, and <tt>..</tt> (dot-dot), which is a link to the parent directory.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">SUSv3 doesn’t require directories to contain <tt>.</tt> and <tt>..</tt> entries. It requires only that an implementation correctly interpret <tt>.</tt> and <tt>..</tt> when they appear in pathnames. A portable application should not rely on the existence of these entries in a directory.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mkdir()</span> system call creates only the last component of <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>. In other words, the call <span class="docEmphasis">mkdir(“aaa/bbb/ccc”, mode)</span> will succeed only if the directories <tt>aaa</tt> and <tt>aaa/bbb</tt> already exist. (This corresponds to the default operation of the <span class="docEmphasis">mkdir(1)</span> command, but <span class="docEmphasis">mkdir(1)</span> also provides the <span class="docEmphasis">-p</span> option to create all of the intervening directory names if they don’t exist.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The GNU C library provides the <span class="docEmphasis">mkdtemp(template)</span> function, which is the directory analog of the <span class="docEmphasis">mkstemp()</span>
 function. It creates a uniquely named directory with read, write, and 
execute permissions enabled for the owner, and no permissions allowed 
for any other users. Instead of returning a file descriptor as its 
result, <span class="docEmphasis">mkdtemp()</span> returns a pointer to a modified string containing the actual directory name in <span class="docEmphasis">template</span>. SUSv3 doesn’t specify this function, and it is not available on all UNIX implementations; it is specified in SUSv4.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">rmdir()</span> system call removes the directory specified in <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, which may be an absolute or a relative pathname.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

int <b>rmdir</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">In order for <span class="docEmphasis">rmdir()</span> to succeed, the directory must be empty. If the final component of <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> is a symbolic link, it is not dereferenced; instead, the error <tt>ENOTDIR</tt> results.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
