<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>18.8. Reading Directories: opendir() and readdir()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">18.8. Reading Directories: <span class="docEmphasis">opendir()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">readdir()</span></h3><p class="docText">The
 library functions described in this section can be used to open a 
directory and retrieve the names of the files it contains one by one.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The library functions for reading directories are layered on top of the <span class="docEmphasis">getdents()</span> system call (which is not part of SUSv3), but provide an interface that is easier to use. Linux also provides a <span class="docEmphasis">readdir(2)</span> system call (as opposed to the <span class="docEmphasis">readdir(3)</span> library function described here), which performs a similar task to, but is made obsolete by, <span class="docEmphasis">getdents()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">opendir()</span> function opens a directory and returns a handle that can be used to refer to the directory in later calls.</p><pre>#include &lt;dirent.h&gt;

DIR *<b>opendir</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">dirpath</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns directory stream handle, or <tt>NULL</tt> on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">opendir()</span> function opens the directory specified by <span class="docEmphasis">dirpath</span> and returns a pointer to a structure of type <span class="docEmphasis">DIR</span>. This structure is a so-called <span class="docEmphasis">directory stream</span>, which is a handle that the caller passes to the other functions described below. Upon return from <span class="docEmphasis">opendir()</span>, the directory stream is positioned at the first entry in the directory list.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">fdopendir()</span> function is like <span class="docEmphasis">opendir()</span>, except that the directory for which a stream is to be created is specified via the open file descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;dirent.h&gt;

DIR *<b>fdopendir</b>(int fd);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns directory stream handle, or <tt>NULL</tt> on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">fdopendir()</span> function is provided so that applications can avoid the kinds of race conditions described in Section 18.11.</p><p class="docText">After a successful call to <span class="docEmphasis">fdopendir()</span>,
 this file descriptor is under the control of the system, and the 
program should not access it in any way other than by using the 
functions described in the remainder of this section.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">fdopendir()</span> function is specified in SUSv4 (but not in SUSv3).</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">readdir()</span> function reads successive entries from a directory stream.</p><pre>#include &lt;dirent.h&gt;

struct dirent *<b>readdir</b>(DIR *<span class="docEmphasis">dirp</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns pointer to a statically allocated structure describing next directory entry, or <tt>NULL</tt> on end-of-directory or error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Each call to <span class="docEmphasis">readdir()</span> reads the next directory entry from the directory stream referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">dirp</span> and returns a pointer to a statically allocated structure of type <span class="docEmphasis">dirent</span>, containing the following information about the entry:</p><pre>struct dirent {
    ino_t d_ino;          /* File i-node number */
    char  d_name[];       /* Null-terminated name of file */
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This structure is overwritten on each call to <span class="docEmphasis">readdir()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">We have omitted various nonstandard fields in the Linux <span class="docEmphasis">dirent</span>
 structure from the above definition, since their use renders an 
application nonportable. The most interesting of these nonstandard 
fields is <span class="docEmphasis">d_type</span>,
 which is also present on BSD derivatives, but not on other UNIX 
implementations. This field holds a value indicating the type of the 
file named in <span class="docEmphasis">d_name</span>, such as <tt>DT_REG</tt> (regular file), <tt>DT_DIR</tt> (directory), <tt>DT_LNK</tt> (symbolic link), or <tt>DT_FIFO</tt> (FIFO). (These names are analogous to the macros in Table 15-1, in Section 15.1.1.5.) Using the information in this field saves the cost of calling <span class="docEmphasis">lstat()</span> in order to discover the file type. Note, however, that, at the time of writing, this field is fully supported only on <span class="docEmphasis">Btrfs</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ext2</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ext3</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">ext4</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Further information about the file referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">d_name</span> can be obtained by calling <span class="docEmphasis">lstat()</span> (or <span class="docEmphasis">stat()</span>, if a symbolic link should be dereferenced) on the pathname constructed using the <span class="docEmphasis">dirpath</span> argument that was specified to <span class="docEmphasis">opendir()</span> concatenated with (a slash and) the value returned in the <span class="docEmphasis">d_name</span> field.</p><p class="docText">The filenames returned by <span class="docEmphasis">readdir()</span>
 are not in sorted order, but rather in the order in which they happen 
to occur in the directory (this depends on the order in which the file 
system adds files to the directory and how it fills gaps in the 
directory list after files are removed). (The command <span class="docEmphasis">ls -f</span> lists files in the same unsorted order that they would be retrieved by <span class="docEmphasis">readdir()</span>.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">We can use the function <span class="docEmphasis">scandir(3)</span>
 to retrieve a sorted list of files matching programmer-defined 
criteria; see the manual page for details. Although not specified in 
SUSv3, <span class="docEmphasis">scandir()</span> is provided on most UNIX implementations. SUSv4 added a specification for <span class="docEmphasis">scandir()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">On end-of-directory or error, <span class="docEmphasis">readdir()</span> returns <tt>NULL</tt>, in the latter case setting <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> to indicate the error. To distinguish these two cases, we can write the following:</p><pre>errno = 0;
direntp = readdir(dirp);
if (direntp == <b>NULL</b>) {
    if (errno != 0) {
        /* Handle error */
    } else {
        /* We reached end-of-directory */
    }
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If the contents of a directory change while a program is scanning it with <span class="docEmphasis">readdir()</span>, the program might not see the changes. SUSv3 explicitly notes that it is unspecified whether <span class="docEmphasis">readdir()</span> will return a filename that has been added to or removed from the directory since the last call to <span class="docEmphasis">opendir()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">rewinddir()</span>. All filenames that have been neither added nor removed since the last such call are guaranteed to be returned.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">rewinddir()</span> function moves the directory stream back to the beginning so that the next call to <span class="docEmphasis">readdir()</span> will begin again with the first file in the directory.</p><pre>#include &lt;dirent.h&gt;

void <b>rewinddir</b>(DIR *<span class="docEmphasis">dirp</span>);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">closedir()</span> function closes the open directory stream referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">dirp</span>, freeing the resources used by the stream.</p><pre>#include &lt;dirent.h&gt;

int <b>closedir</b>(DIR *<span class="docEmphasis">dirp</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Two further functions, <span class="docEmphasis">telldir()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">seekdir()</span>,
 which are also specified in SUSv3, allow random access within a 
directory stream. Refer to the manual pages for further information 
about these functions.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECZDI">18.8.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EGZDI">18.8.1.1. Directory streams and file descriptors</h5><p class="docText">A directory stream has an associated file descriptor. The <span class="docEmphasis">dirfd()</span> function returns the file descriptor associated with the directory stream referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">dirp</span>.</p><pre>#define _BSD_SOURCE             /* Or: #define _SVID_SOURCE */
#include &lt;dirent.h&gt;

int <b>dirfd</b>(DIR *<span class="docEmphasis">dirp</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns file descriptor on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">We might, for example, pass the file descriptor returned by <span class="docEmphasis">dirfd()</span> to <span class="docEmphasis">fchdir()</span> (Section 18.10)
 in order to change the current working directory of the process to the 
corresponding directory. Alternatively, we might pass the file 
descriptor as the <span class="docEmphasis">dirfd</span> argument of one of the functions described in Section 18.11.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">dirfd()</span>
 function also appears on the BSDs, but is present on few other 
implementations. It is not specified in SUSv3, but is specified in 
SUSv4.</p><p class="docText">At this point, it is worth mentioning that <span class="docEmphasis">opendir()</span> automatically sets the close-on-exec flag (<tt>FD_CLOEXEC</tt>)
 for the file descriptor associated with the directory stream. This 
ensures that the file descriptor is automatically closed when an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> is performed. (SUSv3 requires this behavior.) We describe the close-on-exec flag in Section 27.4.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EK3DI">18.8.1.2. Example program</h5><p class="docText">Example 18-2 uses <span class="docEmphasis">opendir()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">readdir()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">closedir()</span>
 to list the contents of each of the directories specified in its 
command line (or in the current working directory if no arguments are 
supplied). Here is an example of the use of this program:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth"><b>$ mkdir sub </b>                             <i> Create a test directory</i>
<b>$ touch sub/a sub/b </b>                     <i> Make some files in the test directory</i>
<b>$ ./list_files sub </b>                      <i> List contents of directory</i>
sub/a
sub/b

					  </pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EO5DI">Example 18-2. Scanning a directory</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>dirs_links/list_files.c</b>
#include &lt;dirent.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

static void             /* List all files in directory 'dirPath' */
listFiles(const char *dirpath)
{
    DIR *dirp;
    struct dirent *dp;
    Boolean isCurrent;          /* True if 'dirpath' is "." */

    isCurrent = strcmp(dirpath, ".") == 0;

    dirp = opendir(dirpath);
    if (dirp  == NULL) {
        errMsg("opendir failed on '%s'", dirpath);
        return;
    }

    /* For each entry in this directory, print directory + filename */

    for (;;) {
        errno = 0;              /* To distinguish error from end-of-directory */
        dp = readdir(dirp);
        if (dp == NULL)
            break;

        if (strcmp(dp-&gt;d_name, ".") == 0 || strcmp(dp-&gt;d_name, "..") == 0)
            continue;           /* Skip . and .. */

        if (!isCurrent)
            printf("%s/", dirpath);
        printf("%s\n", dp-&gt;d_name);
    }

    if (errno != 0)
        errExit("readdir");

    if (closedir(dirp) == -1)
        errMsg("closedir");
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    if (argc &gt; 1 &amp;&amp; strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s [dir...]\n", argv[0]);

    if (argc == 1)              /* No arguments - use current directory */
        listFiles(".");
    else
        for (argv++; *argv; argv++)
            listFiles(*argv);

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
      <b>dirs_links/list_files.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EZ5DI">18.8.1.3. The <span class="docEmphasis">readdir_r()</span> function</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">readdir_r()</span> function is a variation on <span class="docEmphasis">readdir()</span>. The key semantic difference between <span class="docEmphasis">readdir_r()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">readdir()</span> is that the former is reentrant, while the latter is not. This is because <span class="docEmphasis">readdir_r()</span> returns the file entry via the caller-allocated <span class="docEmphasis">entry</span> argument, while <span class="docEmphasis">readdir()</span> returns information via a pointer to a statically allocated structure. We discuss reentrancy in Section 21.1.2 and Section 31.1.</p><pre>#include &lt;dirent.h&gt;

int <b>readdir_r</b>(DIR *<span class="docEmphasis">dirp</span>, struct dirent *<span class="docEmphasis">entry</span>, struct dirent **<span class="docEmphasis">result</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or a positive error number on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Given <span class="docEmphasis">dirp</span>, which is a directory stream previously opened via <span class="docEmphasis">opendir()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">readdir_r()</span> places information about the next directory entry into the <span class="docEmphasis">dirent</span> structure referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">entry</span>. In addition, a pointer to this structure is placed in <span class="docEmphasis">result</span>. If the end of the directory stream is reached, then <tt>NULL</tt> is placed in <span class="docEmphasis">result</span> instead (and <span class="docEmphasis">readdir_r()</span> returns 0). On error, <span class="docEmphasis">readdir_r()</span> doesn’t return -1, but instead returns a positive integer corresponding to one of the <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> values.</p><p class="docText">On Linux, the <span class="docEmphasis">d_name</span> field of the <span class="docEmphasis">dirent</span>
 structure is sized as an array of 256 bytes, which is long enough to 
hold the largest possible filename. Although several other UNIX 
implementations define the same size for <span class="docEmphasis">d_name</span>,
 SUSv3 leaves this point unspecified, and some UNIX implementations 
instead define the field as a 1-byte array, leaving the calling program 
with the task of allocating a structure of the correct size. When doing 
this, we should size the <span class="docEmphasis">d_name</span> field as one greater (for the terminating null byte) than the value of the constant <tt>NAME_MAX</tt>. Portable applications should thus allocate the <span class="docEmphasis">dirent</span> structure as follows:</p><pre>struct dirent *entryp;
size_t len;

len = offsetof(struct dirent, d_name) + <b>NAME_MAX</b> + 1;
entryp = malloc(len);
if (entryp == NULL)
    errExit("malloc");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Using the <tt>offsetof()</tt> macro (defined in <tt>&lt;stddef.h&gt;</tt>) avoids any implementation-specific dependencies on the number and size of fields in the <span class="docEmphasis">dirent</span> structure preceding the <span class="docEmphasis">d_name</span> field (which is always the last field in the structure).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <tt>offsetof()</tt> macro takes two arguments—a structure type and the name of a field within that structure—and returns a value of type <span class="docEmphasis">size_t</span>
 that is the offset in bytes of the field from the beginning of the 
structure. This macro is necessary because a compiler may insert padding
 bytes in a structure to satisfy alignment requirements for types such 
as <span class="docEmphasis">int</span>, 
with the result that a field’s offset within a structure may be greater 
than the sum of the sizes of the fields that precede it.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
