<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>18.9. File Tree Walking: nftw()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">18.9. File Tree Walking: <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span></h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span>
 function allows a program to recursively walk through an entire 
directory subtree performing some operation (i.e., calling some 
programmer-defined function) for each file in the subtree.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span> function is an enhancement of the older <span class="docEmphasis">ftw()</span> function, which performs a similar task. New applications should use <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span> (<span class="docEmphasis">new ftw</span>) because it provides more functionality, and predictable handling of symbolic links (SUSv3 permits <span class="docEmphasis">ftw()</span> either to follow or not follow symbolic links). SUSv3 specifies both <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ftw()</span>, but the latter function is marked obsolete in SUSv4.</p><p class="docText">The GNU C library also provides the BSD-derived <span class="docEmphasis">fts</span> API (<span class="docEmphasis">fts_open()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fts_read()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fts_children()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fts_set()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">fts_close()</span>). These functions perform a similar task to <span class="docEmphasis">ftw()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span>,
 but offer greater flexibility to an application walking the tree. 
However, this API is not standardized and is provided on few UNIX 
implementations other than BSD descendants, so we omit discussion of it 
here.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span> function walks through the directory tree specified by <span class="docEmphasis">dirpath</span> and calls the programmer-defined function <span class="docEmphasis">func</span> once for each file in the directory tree.</p><pre>#define _XOPEN_SOURCE 500
#include &lt;ftw.h&gt;

int <b>nftw</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">dirpath</span>,
         int (*<span class="docEmphasis">func</span>) (const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, const struct stat *<span class="docEmphasis">statbuf</span>,
                      int <span class="docEmphasis">typeflag</span>, struct FTW *<span class="docEmphasis">ftwbuf</span>),
         int <span class="docEmphasis">nopenfd</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 after successful walk of entire tree, or -1 on error, or the first nonzero value returned by a call to <span class="docEmphasis">func</span></p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">By default, <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span>
 performs an unsorted, preorder traversal of the given tree, processing 
each directory before processing the files and subdirectories within 
that directory.</p><p class="docText">While traversing the directory tree, <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span> opens at most one file descriptor for each level of the tree. The <span class="docEmphasis">nopenfd</span> argument specifies the maximum number of file descriptors that <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span> may use. If the depth of the directory tree exceeds this maximum, <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span> does some bookkeeping, and closes and reopens descriptors in order to avoid holding open more than <span class="docEmphasis">nopenfd</span>
 descriptors simultaneously (and consequently runs more slowly). The 
need for this argument was greater under older UNIX implementations, 
some of which had a limit of 20 open file descriptors per process. 
Modern UNIX implementations allow a process to open a large number of 
file descriptors, and thus we can specify a generous number here (say 10
 or more).</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> argument to <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span> is created by ORing (<tt>|</tt>) zero or more of the following constants, which modify the operation of the function:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FTW_CHDIR</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Do a <span class="docEmphasis">chdir()</span> into each directory before processing its contents. This is useful if <span class="docEmphasis">func</span> is designed to do some work in the directory in which the file specified by its <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> argument resides.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FTW_DEPTH</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Do a postorder traversal of the directory tree. This means that <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span> calls <span class="docEmphasis">func</span> on all of the files (and subdirectories) within a directory before executing <span class="docEmphasis">func</span> on the directory itself. (The name of this flag is somewhat misleading—<span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span>
 always does a depth-first, rather than a breadth-first, traversal of 
the directory tree. All that this flag does is convert the traversal 
from preorder to postorder.)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FTW_MOUNT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Don’t cross over into another file system. Thus, if one of the subdirectories of the tree is a mount point, it is not traversed.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FTW_PHYS</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">By default, <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span> dereferences symbolic links. This flag tells it not to do so. Instead, a symbolic link is passed to <span class="docEmphasis">func</span> with a <span class="docEmphasis">typeflag</span> value of <tt>FTW_SL</tt>, as described below.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">For each file, <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span> passes four arguments when calling <span class="docEmphasis">func</span>. The first of these arguments, <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, is the pathname of the file. This pathname may be absolute, if <span class="docEmphasis">dirpath</span>
 was specified as an absolute pathname, or relative to the current 
working directory of the calling process at the time of the call to <span class="docEmphasis">ntfw()</span>, if <span class="docEmphasis">dirpath</span> was expressed as a relative pathname. The second argument, <span class="docEmphasis">statbuf</span>, is a pointer to a <span class="docEmphasis">stat</span> structure (Section 15.1) containing information about this file. The third argument, <span class="docEmphasis">typeflag</span>, provides further information about the file, and has one of the following symbolic values:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FTW_D</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is a directory.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FTW_DNR</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is a directory that can’t be read (and so <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span> doesn’t traverse any of its descendants).</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FTW_DP</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">We are doing a postorder traversal (<tt>FTW_DEPTH</tt>) of a directory, and the current item is a directory whose files and subdirectories have already been processed.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FTW_F</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is a file of any type other than a directory or symbolic link.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FTW_NS</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Calling <span class="docEmphasis">stat()</span> on this file failed, probably because of permission restrictions. The value in <span class="docEmphasis">statbuf</span> is undefined.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FTW_SL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is a symbolic link. This value is returned only if <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span> is called with the <tt>FTW_PHYS</tt> flag.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FTW_SLN</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This item is a dangling symbolic link. This value occurs only if <tt>FTW_PHYS</tt> was not specified in the <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> argument.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">The fourth argument to <span class="docEmphasis">func</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ftwbuf</span>, is a pointer to a structure defined as follows:</p><pre>struct FTW {
    int base;       /* Offset to basename part of pathname */
    int level;      /* Depth of file within tree traversal */
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">base</span> field of this structure is the integer offset of the filename part (the component after the last <tt>/</tt>) of the <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> argument of <span class="docEmphasis">func</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">level</span> field is the depth of this item relative to the starting point of the traversal (which is level 0).</p><p class="docText">Each time it is called, <span class="docEmphasis">func</span> must return an integer value, and this value is interpreted by <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span>. Returning 0 tells <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span> to continue the tree walk, and if all calls to <span class="docEmphasis">func</span> return 0, <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span> itself returns 0 to its caller. Returning a nonzero value tells <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span> to immediately stop the tree walk, in which case <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span> returns the same nonzero value as its return value.</p><p class="docText">Because <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span>
 uses dynamically allocated data structures, the only way that a program
 should ever prematurely terminate a directory tree walk is by returning
 a nonzero value from <span class="docEmphasis">func</span>. Using <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> (Section 6.8) to exit from <span class="docEmphasis">func</span> may lead to unpredictable results—at the very least, memory leaks in a program.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E61DI">18.9.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ED2DI">18.9.1.1. Example program</h5><p class="docText">Example 18-3 demonstrates the use of <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span>.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EP4DI">Example 18-3. Using <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span> to walk a directory tree</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>dirs_links/nftw_dir_tree.c</b>
#define _XOPEN_SOURCE 600       /* Get nftw() and S_IFSOCK declarations */
#include &lt;ftw.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

static void
usageError(const char *progName, const char *msg)
{
    if (msg != NULL)
        fprintf(stderr, "%s\n", msg);
    fprintf(stderr, "Usage: %s [-d] [-m] [-p] [directory-path]\n", progName);
    fprintf(stderr, "\t-d Use FTW_DEPTH flag\n");
    fprintf(stderr, "\t-m Use FTW_MOUNT flag\n");
    fprintf(stderr, "\t-p Use FTW_PHYS flag\n");
    exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
}

static int                      /* Function called by nftw() */
dirTree(const char *pathname, const struct stat *sbuf, int type,
        struct FTW *ftwb)
{
    switch (sbuf-&gt;st_mode &amp; S_IFMT) {       /* Print file type */
    case S_IFREG:  printf("-"); break;
    case S_IFDIR:  printf("d"); break;
    case S_IFCHR:  printf("c"); break;
    case S_IFBLK:  printf("b"); break;
    case S_IFLNK:  printf("l"); break;
    case S_IFIFO:  printf("p"); break;
    case S_IFSOCK: printf("s"); break;
    default:       printf("?"); break;      /* Should never happen (on Linux) */
    }

    printf(" %s  ",
            (type == FTW_D)  ? "D  " : (type == FTW_DNR) ? "DNR" :
            (type == FTW_DP) ? "DP " : (type == FTW_F)   ? "F  " :
            (type == FTW_SL) ? "SL " : (type == FTW_SLN) ? "SLN" :
            (type == FTW_NS) ? "NS " : "  ");

    if (type != FTW_NS)
        printf("%7ld ", (long) sbuf-&gt;st_ino);
    else
        printf("        ");

    printf(" %*s", 4 * ftwb-&gt;level, "");        /* Indent suitably */
    printf("%s\n",  &amp;pathname[ftwb-&gt;base]);     /* Print basename */
    return 0;                                   /* Tell nftw() to continue */
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int flags, opt;

    flags = 0;
    while ((opt = getopt(argc, argv, "dmp")) != -1) {
        switch (opt) {
        case 'd': flags |= FTW_DEPTH;   break;
        case 'm': flags |= FTW_MOUNT;   break;
        case 'p': flags |= FTW_PHYS;    break;
        default:  usageError(argv[0], NULL);
        }
    }

    if (argc &gt; optind + 1)
        usageError(argv[0], NULL);

    if (nftw((argc &gt; optind) ? argv[optind] : ".", dirTree, 10, flags) == -1) {
        perror("nftw");
        exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
    }
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
      <b>dirs_links/nftw_dir_tree.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">The program in Example 18-3
 displays an indented hierarchy of the filenames in a directory tree, 
one file per line, as well as the file type and i-node number. 
Command-line options can be used to specify settings for the <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> argument used to call <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span>.
 The following shell session shows examples of what we see when we run 
this program. We first create a new empty subdirectory, which we 
populate with various types of files:</p><pre><b>$ mkdir dir </b>
<b>$ touch dir/a dir/b </b>                 <i> Create some plain files</i>
<b>$ ln -s a dir/sl </b>                    <i> and a symbolic link</i>
<b>$ ln -s x dir/dsl </b>                   <i> and a dangling symbolic link</i>
<b>$ mkdir dir/sub </b>                     <i> and a subdirectory</i>
<b>$ touch dir/sub/x </b>                   <i> with a file of its own</i>
<b>$ mkdir dir/sub2 </b>                    <i> and another subdirectory</i>
<b>$ chmod 0 dir/sub2 </b>                  <i> that is not readable</i></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We then use our program to invoke <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span> with a <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> argument of 0:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth"><b>$ ./nftw_dir_tree dir </b>
d D    2327983  dir
- F    2327984      a
- F    2327985      b
- F    2327984      sl              <i> The symbolic link sl was resolved to  a</i>
l SLN  2327987      dsl
d D    2327988      sub
- F    2327989          x
d DNR  2327994      sub2

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In the above output, we can see that the symbolic link <tt>s1</tt> was resolved.</p><p class="docText">We then use our program to invoke <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span> with a <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> argument containing <tt>FTW_PHYS</tt> and <tt>FTW_DEPTH</tt>:</p><pre><b>$ ./nftw_dir_tree -p -d dir </b>
- F    2327984      a
- F    2327985      b
l SL   2327986      sl              <i> The symbolic link sl was not resolved</i>
l SL   2327987      dsl
- F    2327989          x
d DP   2327988      sub
d DNR  2327994      sub2
d DP   2327983  dir</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">From the above output, we can see that the symbolic link <tt>s1</tt> was not resolved.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E3AAK">18.9.1.2. The <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span> <tt>FTW_ACTIONRETVAL</tt> flag</h5><p class="docText">Starting with version 2.3.3, <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> permits an additional, nonstandard flag to be specified in <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>. This flag, <tt>FTW_ACTIONRETVAL</tt>, changes the way that <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span> interprets the return value from calls to <span class="docEmphasis">func()</span>. When this flag is specified, <span class="docEmphasis">func()</span> should return one of the following values:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FTW_CONTINUE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Continue processing entries in the directory tree, as with the traditional 0 return from <span class="docEmphasis">func()</span>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FTW_SKIP_SIBLINGS</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Don’t process any further entries in the current directory; resume processing in the parent directory.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FTW_SKIP_SUBTREE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">If <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> is a directory (i.e., <span class="docEmphasis">typeflag</span> is <tt>FTW_D</tt>), then don’t call <span class="docEmphasis">func()</span> for entries under that directory. Processing resumes with the next sibling of this directory.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">FTW_STOP</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Don’t process any further entries in the directory tree, as with the traditional nonzero return from <span class="docEmphasis">func()</span>. The value <tt>FTW_STOP</tt> is returned to the caller of <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span>.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">The <tt>_GNU_SOURCE</tt> feature test macro must be defined in order to obtain the definition of <tt>FTW_ACTIONRETVAL</tt> from <tt>&lt;ftw.h&gt;</tt>.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
