<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>18.10. The Current Working Directory of a Process</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">18.10. The Current Working Directory of a Process</h3><p class="docText">A process’s <span class="docEmphasis">current working directory</span>
 defines the starting point for the resolution of relative pathnames 
referred to by the process. A new process inherits its current working 
directory from its parent.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EYSDI">18.10.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E3SDI">18.10.1.1. Retrieving the current working directory</h5><p class="docText">A process can retrieve its current working directory using <span class="docEmphasis">getcwd()</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

char *<b>getcwd</b>(char *<span class="docEmphasis">cwdbuf</span>, size_t <span class="docEmphasis">size</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns <span class="docEmphasis">cwdbuf</span> on success, or <tt>NULL</tt> on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getcwd()</span>
 function places a null-terminated string containing the absolute 
pathname of the current working directory into the allocated buffer 
pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">cwdbuf</span>. The caller must allocate the <span class="docEmphasis">cwdbuf</span> buffer to be at least <span class="docEmphasis">size</span> bytes in length. (Normally, we would size <span class="docEmphasis">cwdbuf</span> using the <tt>PATH_MAX</tt> constant.)</p><p class="docText">On success, <span class="docEmphasis">getcwd()</span> returns a pointer to <span class="docEmphasis">cwdbuf</span> as its function result. If the pathname for the current working directory exceeds <span class="docEmphasis">size</span> bytes, then <span class="docEmphasis">getcwd()</span> returns <tt>NULL</tt>, with <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> set to <tt>ERANGE</tt>.</p><p class="docText">On Linux/x86-32, <span class="docEmphasis">getcwd()</span> returns a maximum of 4096 (<tt>PATH_MAX</tt>) bytes. If the current working directory (and <span class="docEmphasis">cwdbuf</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">size</span>) exceeds this limit, then the pathname is silently truncated, removing complete directory prefixes from the <span class="docEmphasis">beginning</span> of the string (which is still null-terminated). In other words, we can’t use <span class="docEmphasis">getcwd()</span> reliably when the length of the absolute pathname for the current working directory exceeds this limit.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In fact, the Linux <span class="docEmphasis">getcwd()</span>
 system call internally allocates a virtual memory page for the returned
 pathname. On the x86-32 architecture, the page size is 4096 bytes, but 
on architectures with larger page sizes (e.g., Alpha with a page size of
 8192 bytes), <span class="docEmphasis">getcwd()</span> can return larger pathnames.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If the <span class="docEmphasis">cwdbuf</span> argument is <tt>NULL</tt> and <span class="docEmphasis">size</span> is 0, then the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> wrapper function for <span class="docEmphasis">getcwd()</span>
 allocates a buffer as large as required and returns a pointer to that 
buffer as its function result. To avoid memory leaks, the caller must 
later deallocate this buffer with <span class="docEmphasis">free()</span>.
 Reliance on this feature should be avoided in portable applications. 
Most other implementations provide a simpler extension of the SUSv3 
specification: if <span class="docEmphasis">cwdbuf</span> is <tt>NULL</tt>, then <span class="docEmphasis">getcwd()</span> allocates <span class="docEmphasis">size</span> bytes and uses this buffer to return the result to the caller. The <span class="docEmphasis">glibc getcwd()</span> implementation also provides this feature.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The GNU C library also provides two other functions for obtaining the current working directory. The BSD-derived <span class="docEmphasis">getwd(path)</span>
 function is vulnerable to buffer overruns, since it provides no method 
of specifying an upper limit for the size of the returned pathname. The <span class="docEmphasis">get_current_dir_name()</span>
 function returns a string containing the current working directory name
 as its function result. This function is easy to use, but it is not 
portable. For security and portability, <span class="docEmphasis">getcwd()</span> is preferred over these two functions (as long as we avoid using the GNU extensions).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">With suitable permissions (roughly, we own the process or have the <tt>CAP_SYS_PTRACE</tt> capability), we can determine the current working directory of any process by reading (<span class="docEmphasis">readlink()</span>) the contents of the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/cwd</tt> symbolic link.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EVXDI">18.10.1.2. Changing the current working directory</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">chdir()</span> system call changes the calling process’s current working directory to the relative or absolute pathname specified in <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> (which is dereferenced if it is a symbolic link).</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

int <b>chdir</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">fchdir()</span> system call does the same as <span class="docEmphasis">chdir()</span>, except that the directory is specified via a file descriptor previously obtained by opening the directory with <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

int <b>fchdir</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">We can use <span class="docEmphasis">fchdir()</span>
 to change the process’s current working directory to another location, 
and then later return to the original location, as follows:</p><pre>int fd;

fd = open(".", O_RDONLY);       /* Remember where we are */
chdir(somepath);                /* Go somewhere else */
fchdir(fd);                     /* Return to original directory */
close(fd);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The equivalent using <span class="docEmphasis">chdir()</span> is as follows:</p><pre>char buf[PATH_MAX];

getcwd(buf, PATH_MAX);          /* Remember where we are */
chdir(somepath);                /* Go somewhere else */
chdir(buf);                     /* Return to original directory */</pre><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
