<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>18.11. Operating Relative to a Directory File Descriptor</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">18.11. Operating Relative to a Directory File Descriptor</h3><p class="docText">Starting
 with kernel 2.6.16, Linux provides a range of new system calls that 
perform similar tasks to various traditional system calls, but provide 
additional functionality that is useful to some applications. These 
system calls are summarized in Table 18-2.
 We describe these system calls in this chapter because they provide 
variations on the traditional semantics of the process’s current working
 directory.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 18-2. System calls that use a directory file descriptor to interpret relative pathnames</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">New interface</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Traditional analog</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Notes</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">faccessat()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">access()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Supports <tt>AT_EACCESS</tt> and <tt>AT_SYMLINK_NOFOLLOW</tt> flags</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">fchmodat()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">chmod()</span></td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">fchownat()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">chown()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Supports <tt>AT_SYMLINK_NOFOLLOW</tt> flag</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">fstatat()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">stat()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Supports <tt>AT_SYMLINK_NOFOLLOW</tt> flag</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">linkat()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">link()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Supports (since Linux 2.6.18) <tt>AT_SYMLINK_FOLLOW</tt> flag</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">mkdirat()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">mkdir()</span></td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">mkfifoat()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">mkfifo()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Library function layered on top of <tt>mknodat()</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">mknodat()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">mknod()</span></td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">openat()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">open()</span></td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">readlinkat()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">readlink()</span></td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">renameat()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">rename()</span></td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">symlinkat()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">symlink()</span></td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">unlinkat()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">unlink()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Supports <tt>AT_REMOVEDIR</tt> flag</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">utimensat()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">utimes()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Supports <tt>AT_SYMLINK_NOFOLLOW</tt> flag</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">In order to describe these system calls, we’ll use a specific example: <span class="docEmphasis">openat()</span>.</p><pre>#define _XOPEN_SOURCE 700     /* Or define _POSIX_C_SOURCE &gt;= 200809 */
#include &lt;fcntl.h&gt;

int <b>openat</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">dirfd</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, int
 <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>, ... /* mode_t  <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> */);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns file descriptor on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">openat()</span> system call is similar to the traditional <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> system call, but adds an argument, <span class="docEmphasis">dirfd</span>, that is used as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">If <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> specifies a relative pathname, then it is interpreted relative to the directory referred to by the open file descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">dirfd</span>, rather than relative to the process’s current working directory.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> specifies a relative pathname, and <span class="docEmphasis">dirfd</span> contains the special value <tt>AT_FDCWD</tt>, then <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> is interpreted relative to the process’s current working directory (i.e., the same behavior as <span class="docEmphasis">open(2)</span>).</p></li><li><p class="docList">If <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> specifies an absolute pathname, then <span class="docEmphasis">dirfd</span> is ignored.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> argument of <span class="docEmphasis">openat()</span> serves the same purpose as for <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>. However, some of the system calls listed in Table 18-2 support a <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>
 argument that is not provided by the corresponding traditional system 
call, and the purpose of this argument is to modify the semantics of the
 call. The most frequently provided flag is <tt>AT_SYMLINK_NOFOLLOW</tt>, which specifies that if <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> is a symbolic link, then the system call should operate on the link, rather than the file to which it refers. (The <span class="docEmphasis">linkat()</span> system call provides the <tt>AT_SYMLINK_FOLLOW</tt> flag, which performs the converse action, changing the default behavior of <span class="docEmphasis">linkat()</span> so that it dereferences <span class="docEmphasis">oldpath</span> if it is a symbolic link.) For details of the other flags, refer to the corresponding manual pages.</p><p class="docText">The system calls listed in Table 18-2 are supported for two reasons (again, we explain using the example of <span class="docEmphasis">openat()</span>):</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Using <span class="docEmphasis">openat()</span> allows an application to avoid certain race conditions that can occur when <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>
 is used to open files in locations other than the current working 
directory. These races can occur because some component of the directory
 prefix of <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> could be changed in parallel with the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> call. By opening a file descriptor for the target directory, and passing that descriptor to <span class="docEmphasis">openat()</span>, such races can be avoided.</p></li><li><p class="docList">In Chapter 29,
 we’ll see that the working directory is a process attribute that is 
shared by all threads of the process. For some applications, it is 
useful for different threads to have different “virtual” working 
directories. An application can emulate this functionality using <span class="docEmphasis">openat()</span> in conjunction with directory file descriptors maintained by the application.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">These
 system calls are not standardized in SUSv3, but are included in SUSv4. 
In order to expose the declaration of each of these system calls, the <tt>_XOPEN_SOURCE</tt>
 feature test macro must be defined with a value greater than or equal 
to 700 before including the appropriate header file (e.g., <tt>&lt;fcntl.h&gt;</tt> for <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>). Alternatively, the <tt>_POSIX_C_SOURCE</tt> macro can be defined with a value greater than or equal to 200809. (Before <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> 2.10, the <tt>_ATFILE_SOURCE</tt> macro needed to be defined to expose the declarations of these system calls.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Solaris 9 and later provide versions of some of the interfaces listed in Table 18-2, with slightly different semantics.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
