<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>18.12. Changing the Root Directory of a Process: chroot()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">18.12. Changing the Root Directory of a Process: <span class="docEmphasis">chroot()</span></h3><p class="docText">Every process has a <span class="docEmphasis">root directory</span>,
 which is the point from which absolute pathnames (i.e., those beginning
 with /) are interpreted. By default, this is the real root directory of
 the file system. (A new process inherits its parent’s root directory.) 
On occasion, it is useful for a process to change its root directory, 
and a privileged (<tt>CAP_SYS_CHROOT</tt>) process can do this using the <span class="docEmphasis">chroot()</span> system call.</p><pre>#define _BSD_SOURCE
#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

int <b>chroot</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">chroot()</span> system call changes the process’s root directory to the directory specified by <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>
 (which is dereferenced if it is a symbolic link). Thereafter, all 
absolute pathnames are interpreted as starting from that location in the
 file system. This is sometimes referred to as setting up a <span class="docEmphasis">chroot</span> jail, since the program is then confined to a particular area of the file system.</p><p class="docText">SUSv2 contained a specification for <span class="docEmphasis">chroot()</span> (marked LEGACY), but this was removed in SUSv3. Nevertheless, <span class="docEmphasis">chroot()</span> appears on most UNIX implementations.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">chroot()</span> system call is employed by the <span class="docEmphasis">chroot</span> command, which enables us to execute shell commands in a <span class="docEmphasis">chroot</span> jail.</p><p class="docText">The root directory of any process can be found by reading (<span class="docEmphasis">readlink()</span>) the contents of the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/root</tt> symbolic link.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The classic example of the use of <span class="docEmphasis">chroot()</span> is in the <span class="docEmphasis">ftp</span> program. As a security measure, when a user logs in anonymously under FTP, the <span class="docEmphasis">ftp</span> program uses <span class="docEmphasis">chroot()</span>
 to set the root directory for the new process to the directory 
specifically reserved for anonymous logins. After the chroot() call, the
 user is limited to the file-system subtree under their new root 
directory, so they can’t roam around the entire file system. (This 
relies on the fact that the root directory is its own parent; that is, <tt>/..</tt> is a link to <tt>/</tt>, so that changing directory to <tt>/</tt> and then attempting a <span class="docEmphasis">cd ..</span> leaves the user in the same directory.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Some
 UNIX implementations (but not Linux) allow multiple hard links to a 
directory, so that it is possible to create a hard link within a 
subdirectory to its parent (or a further removed ancestor). On 
implementations permitting this, the presence of a hard link that 
reaches outside the jail directory tree compromises the jail. Symbolic 
links to directories outside the jail don’t pose a problem—because they 
are interpreted within the framework of the process’s new root 
directory, they can’t reach outside the <span class="docEmphasis">chroot</span> jail.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Normally, we can’t execute arbitrary programs within a <span class="docEmphasis">chroot</span>
 jail. This is because most programs are dynamically linked against 
shared libraries. Therefore, we must either limit ourselves to executing
 statically linked programs, or replicate a standard set of system 
directories containing shared libraries (including, for example, <tt>/lib</tt> and <tt>/usr/lib</tt>) within the jail (in this regard, the bind mount feature described in Section 14.9.4 can be useful).</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">chroot()</span>
 system call was not conceived as a completely secure jail mechanism. To
 begin with, there are various ways in which a privileged program can 
subsequently use a further <span class="docEmphasis">chroot()</span> call to break out of the jail. For example, a privileged (<tt>CAP_MKNOD</tt>) program can use <span class="docEmphasis">mknod()</span> to create a memory device file (similar to <tt>/dev/mem</tt>)
 giving access to the contents of RAM, and, from that point, anything is
 possible. In general, it is advisable not to include set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span> programs within a <span class="docEmphasis">chroot</span> jail file system.</p><p class="docText">Even with unprivileged programs, we must take care to prevent the following possible routes for breaking out of a <span class="docEmphasis">chroot</span> jail:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Calling <span class="docEmphasis">chroot()</span> doesn’t change the process’s current working directory. Thus, a call to <span class="docEmphasis">chroot()</span> is typically preceded or followed by a call to <span class="docEmphasis">chdir()</span> (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">chdir</span>(“/”) after the <span class="docEmphasis">chroot()</span>
 call). If this is not done, then a process can use relative pathnames 
to access files and directories outside the jail. (Some BSD derivatives 
prevent this possibility—if the current working directory lies outside 
the new root directory tree, then it is changed by the <span class="docEmphasis">chroot()</span> call to be the same as the root directory.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">If a process holds an open file descriptor for a directory outside the jail, then the combination of <span class="docEmphasis">fchdir()</span> plus <span class="docEmphasis">chroot()</span> can be used to break out of the jail, as shown in the following code sample:</p><pre>int fd;

fd = open("/", O_RDONLY);
chroot("/home/mtk");            /* Jailed */
fchdir(fd);
chroot(".");                    /* Out of jail */</pre><br/>
<p class="docList">To prevent this possibility, 
we must close all open file descriptors referring to directories outside
 the jail. (Some other UNIX implementations provide the <span class="docEmphasis">fchroot()</span> system call, which can be used to achieve a similar result to the above code snippet.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">Even
 preventing the preceding possibilities is insufficient to stop an 
arbitrary unprivileged program (i.e., one whose operation we don’t have 
control over) from breaking out of the jail. The jailed process can 
still use a UNIX domain socket to receive a file descriptor (from 
another process) referring to a directory outside the jail. (We briefly 
explain the concept of passing file descriptors between processes via a 
socket in Section 61.13.3.) By specifying this file descriptor in a call to <span class="docEmphasis">fchdir()</span>,
 the program can set its current working directory outside the jail and 
then access arbitrary files and directories using relative pathnames.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Some BSD derivatives provide a <span class="docEmphasis">jail()</span>
 system call, which addresses the points described above, as well as 
several others, to create a jail that is secure even for a privileged 
process.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
