<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>18.13. Resolving a Pathname: realpath()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">18.13. Resolving a Pathname: <span class="docEmphasis">realpath()</span></h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">realpath()</span> library function dereferences all symbolic links in <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>
 (a null-terminated string) and resolves all references to /. and /.. to
 produce a null-terminated string containing the corresponding absolute 
pathname.</p><pre>#include &lt;stdlib.h&gt;

char *<b>realpath</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, char *<span class="docEmphasis">resolved_path</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns pointer to resolved pathname on success, or <tt>NULL</tt> on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The resulting string is placed in the buffer pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">resolved_path</span>, which should be a character array of at least <tt>PATH_MAX</tt> bytes. On success, <span class="docEmphasis">realpath()</span> also returns a pointer to this resolved string.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> implementation of <span class="docEmphasis">realpath()</span> allows the caller to specify <span class="docEmphasis">resolved_path</span> as <tt>NULL</tt>. In this case, <span class="docEmphasis">realpath()</span> allocates a buffer of up to <tt>PATH_MAX</tt>
 bytes for the resolved pathname and returns a pointer to that buffer as
 the function result. (The caller must deallocate this buffer using <span class="docEmphasis">free()</span>.) SUSv3 doesn’t specify this extension, but it is specified in SUSv4.</p><p class="docText">The program in Example 18-4 uses <span class="docEmphasis">readlink()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">realpath()</span>
 to read the contents of a symbolic link and to resolve the link to an 
absolute pathname. Here is an example of the use of this program:</p><pre><b>$ pwd </b>                                       <i> Where are we?</i>
/home/mtk
<b>$ touch x </b>                                   <i> Make a file</i>
<b>$ ln -s x y </b>                                 <i> and a symbolic link to it</i>
<b>$ ./view_symlink y </b>
readlink: y --&gt; x
realpath: y --&gt; /home/mtk/x</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ENXDI">Example 18-4. Read and resolve a symbolic link</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>dirs_links/view_symlink.c</b>
#include &lt;sys/stat.h&gt;
#include &lt;limits.h&gt;             /* For definition of PATH_MAX */
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

#define BUF_SIZE PATH_MAX

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    struct stat statbuf;
    char buf[BUF_SIZE];
    ssize_t numBytes;

    if (argc != 2 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s pathname\n", argv[0]);

    if (lstat(argv[1], &amp;statbuf) == -1)
        errExit("lstat");

    if (!S_ISLNK(statbuf.st_mode))
        fatal("%s is not a symbolic link", argv[1]);

    numBytes = readlink(argv[1], buf, BUF_SIZE - 1);
    if (numBytes == -1)
        errExit("readlink");
    buf[numBytes] = '\0';                       /* Add terminating null byte */
    printf("readlink: %s --&gt; %s\n", argv[1], buf);

    if (realpath(argv[1], buf) == NULL)
        errExit("realpath");
    printf("realpath: %s --&gt; %s\n", argv[1], buf);

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
      <b>dirs_links/view_symlink.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
