<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>18.15. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">18.15. Summary</h3><p class="docText">An
 i-node doesn’t contain a file’s name. Instead, files are assigned names
 via entries in directories, which are tables listing filename and 
i-node number correspondences. These directory entries are called (hard)
 links. A file may have multiple links, all of which enjoy equal status.
 Links are created and removed using <span class="docEmphasis">link()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">unlink()</span>. A file can be renamed using the <span class="docEmphasis">rename()</span> system call.</p><p class="docText">A symbolic (or soft) link is created using <span class="docEmphasis">symlink()</span>.
 Symbolic links are similar to hard links in some respects, with the 
differences that symbolic links can cross file-system boundaries and can
 refer to directories. A symbolic link is just a file containing the 
name of another file; this name may be retrieved using <span class="docEmphasis">readlink()</span>.
 A symbolic link is not included in the (target) i-node’s link count, 
and it may be left dangling if the filename to which it refers is 
removed. Some system calls automatically dereference (follow) symbolic 
links; others do not. In some cases, two versions of a system call are 
provided: one that dereferences symbolic links and another that does 
not. Examples are <span class="docEmphasis">stat()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">lstat()</span>.</p><p class="docText">Directories are created with <span class="docEmphasis">mkdir()</span> and removed using <span class="docEmphasis">rmdir()</span>. To scan the contents of a directory, we can use <span class="docEmphasis">opendir()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">readdir()</span>, and related functions. The <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span>
 function allows a program to walk an entire directory tree, calling a 
programmer-defined function to operate on each file in the tree.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">remove()</span> function can be used to remove a file (i.e., a link) or an empty directory.</p><p class="docText">Each
 process has a root directory, which determines the point from which 
absolute pathnames are interpreted, and a current working directory, 
which determines the point from which relative pathnames are 
interpreted. The <span class="docEmphasis">chroot()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">chdir()</span> system calls are used to change these attributes. The <span class="docEmphasis">getcwd()</span> function returns a process’s current working directory.</p><p class="docText">Linux provides a set of system calls (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">openat()</span>) that behave like their traditional counterparts (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>),
 except that relative pathnames can be interpreted with respect to the 
directory specified by a file descriptor supplied to the call (instead 
of using the process’s current working directory). This is useful for 
avoiding certain types of race conditions and for implementing 
per-thread virtual working directories.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">realpath()</span>
 function resolves a pathname—dereferencing all symbolic links and 
resolving all references to . and .. to corresponding directories—to 
yield a corresponding absolute pathname. The <span class="docEmphasis">dirname()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">basename()</span> functions can be used to parse a pathname into directory and filename components.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
