<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>18.16. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">18.16. Exercises</h3><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">In Section 4.3.2, we noted that it is not possible to open a file for writing if it is currently being executed (<span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> returns -1, with <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> set to <tt>ETXTBSY</tt>). Nevertheless, it is possible to do the following from the shell:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>cc -o longrunner longrunner.c </b>
$ <b>./longrunner &amp; </b>                        <i> Leave running in background</i>
$ <b>vi longrunner.c </b>                       <i> Make some changes to the source code</i>
$ <b>cc -o longrunner longrunner.c </b>

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docList">The last command overwrites the existing executable of the same name. How is this possible? (For a clue, use <span class="docEmphasis">ls -li</span> to look at the i-node number of the executable file after each compilation.)</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Why does the call to <span class="docEmphasis">chmod()</span> in the following code fail?</p><pre>mkdir("test", S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR | S_IXUSR);
chdir("test");
fd = open("myfile", O_RDWR | O_CREAT, S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR);
symlink("myfile", "../mylink");
chmod("../mylink", S_IRUSR);</pre><br/>
</div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Implement <span class="docEmphasis">realpath()</span>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Modify the program in Example 18-2 (<tt>list_files.c</tt>) to use <span class="docEmphasis">readdir_r()</span> instead of <span class="docEmphasis">readdir()</span>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Implement a function that performs the equivalent of <span class="docEmphasis">getcwd()</span>. A useful tip for solving this problem is that you can find the name of the current working directory by using <span class="docEmphasis">opendir()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">readdir()</span> to walk through each of the entries in the parent directory (<tt>..</tt>) to find an entry with the same i-node and device number as the current working directory (i.e., respectively, the <span class="docEmphasis">st_ino</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">st_dev</span> fields in the <span class="docEmphasis">stat</span> structure returned by <span class="docEmphasis">stat()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">lstat()</span>). Thus, it is possible to construct the directory path by walking up the directory tree (<span class="docEmphasis">chdir(“..”)</span>)
 one step at a time and performing such scans. The walk can be finished 
when the parent directory is the same as the current working directory 
(recall that <tt>/..</tt> is the same as <tt>/</tt>). The caller should be left in the same directory in which it started, regardless of whether your <span class="docEmphasis">getcwd()</span> function succeeds or fails (<span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> plus <span class="docEmphasis">fchdir()</span> are handy for this purpose).</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Modify the program in Example 18-3 (<tt>nftw_dir_tree.c</tt>) to use the <tt>FTW_DEPTH</tt> flag. Note the difference in the order in which the directory tree is traversed.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write a program that uses <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span>
 to traverse a directory tree and finishes by printing out counts and 
percentages of the various types (regular, directory, symbolic link, and
 so on) of files in the tree.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Implement <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span>. (This will require the use of the <span class="docEmphasis">opendir()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">readdir()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">closedir()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">stat()</span> system calls, among others.)</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">In Section 18.10, we showed two different techniques (using <span class="docEmphasis">fchdir()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">chdir()</span>,
 respectively) to return to the previous current working directory after
 changing the current working directory to another location. Suppose we 
are performing such an operation repeatedly. Which method do you expect 
to be more efficient? Why? Write a program to confirm your answer.</p></div></li></ol></div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
