<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 19. Monitoring File Events</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0EVXDI">Chapter 19. Monitoring File Events</h2><p class="docText">Some
 applications need to be able to monitor files or directories in order 
to determine whether events have occurred for the monitored objects. For
 example, a graphical file manager needs to be able to determine when 
files are added or removed from the directory that is currently being 
displayed, or a daemon may want to monitor its configuration file in 
order to know if the file has been changed.</p><p class="docText">Starting with kernel 2.6.13, Linux provides the <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> mechanism, which allows an application to monitor file events. This chapter describes the use of <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> mechanism replaces an older mechanism, <span class="docEmphasis">dnotify</span>, which provided a subset of the functionality of <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span>. We describe <span class="docEmphasis">dnotify</span> briefly at the end of this chapter, focusing on why <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> is better.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">dnotify</span> mechanisms are Linux-specific. (A few other systems provide similar mechanisms. For example, the BSDs provide the <span class="docEmphasis">kqueue</span> API.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">A few libraries provide an API that is more abstract and portable than <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">dnotify</span>. The use of these libraries may be preferable for some applications. Some of these libraries employ <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">dnotify</span>, on systems where they are available. Two such libraries are FAM (File Alteration Monitor, http://oss.sgi.com/projects/fam/) and Gamin (http://www.gnome.org/~veillard/gamin/).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
