<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>19.1. Overview</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">19.1. Overview</h3><p class="docText">The key steps in the use of the <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> API are as follows:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The application uses <span class="docEmphasis">inotify_init()</span> to create an <span class="docEmphasis">inotify instance</span>. This system call returns a file descriptor that is used to refer to the <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> instance in later operations.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The application informs the kernel about which files are of interest by using <span class="docEmphasis">inotify_add_watch()</span> to add items to the watch list of the <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span>
 instance created in the previous step. Each watch item consists of a 
pathname and an associated bit mask. The bit mask specifies the set of 
events to be monitored for the pathname. As its function result, <span class="docEmphasis">inotify_add_watch()</span> returns a <span class="docEmphasis">watch descriptor</span>, which is used to refer to the watch in later operations. (The <span class="docEmphasis">inotify_rm_watch()</span> system call performs the converse task, removing a watch that was previously added to an <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> instance.)</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">In order to obtain event notifications, the application performs <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> operations on the <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> file descriptor. Each successful <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> returns one or more <span class="docEmphasis">inotify_event</span> structures, each containing information about an event that occurred on one of the pathnames being watched via this <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> instance.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">When the application has finished monitoring, it closes the <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> file descriptor. This automatically removes all watch items associated with the <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> instance.</p></div></li></ol></div><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span>
 mechanism can be used to monitor files or directories. When monitoring a
 directory, the application will be informed about events for the 
directory itself and for files inside the directory.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span>
 monitoring mechanism is not recursive. If an application wants to 
monitor events within an entire directory subtree, it must issue <span class="docEmphasis">inotify_add_watch()</span> calls for each directory in the tree.</p><p class="docText">An <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> file descriptor can be monitored using <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>, and, since Linux 2.6.25, signal-driven I/O. If events are available to be read, then these interfaces indicate the <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> file descriptor as being readable. See Chapter 63 for further details of these interfaces.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> mechanism is an optional Linux kernel component that is configured via the options <tt>CONFIG_INOTIFY</tt> and <tt>CONFIG_INOTIFY_USER</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
