<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>19.6. An Older System for Monitoring File Events: dnotify</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">19.6. An Older System for Monitoring File Events: <span class="docEmphasis">dnotify</span></h3><p class="docText">Linux provides another mechanism for monitoring file events. This mechanism, known as <span class="docEmphasis">dnotify</span>, has been available since kernel 2.4, but has been made obsolete by <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">dnotify</span> mechanism suffers a number of limitations compared with <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span>:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">dnotify</span>
 mechanism provides notification of events by sending signals to the 
application. Using signals as a notification mechanism complicates 
application design (Section 22.12). It also makes the use of <span class="docEmphasis">dnotify</span> within a library difficult, since the calling program might change the disposition of the notification signal(s). The <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> mechanism doesn’t use signals.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The monitoring unit of <span class="docEmphasis">dnotify</span> is a directory. The application is informed when an operation is performed on any file in that directory. By contrast, <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> can be used to monitor directories or individual files.</p></li><li><p class="docList">In order to monitor a directory, <span class="docEmphasis">dnotify</span>
 requires the application to open a file descriptor for that directory. 
The use of file descriptors causes two problems. First, because it is 
busy, the file system containing the directory can’t be unmounted. 
Second, because one file descriptor is required for each directory, an 
application can end up consuming a large number of file descriptors. 
Because <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> doesn’t use file descriptors, it avoids these problems.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The information provided by <span class="docEmphasis">dnotify</span> about file events is less precise than that provided by <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span>. When a file is changed inside a monitored directory, <span class="docEmphasis">dnotify</span>
 tells us that an event has occurred, but doesn’t tell us which file was
 involved in the event. The application must determine this by caching 
information about the directory contents. Furthermore, <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> provides more detailed information than <span class="docEmphasis">dnotify</span> about the type of event that has occurred.</p></li><li><p class="docList">In some circumstances, <span class="docEmphasis">dnotify</span> doesn’t provide reliable notification of file events.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Further information about <span class="docEmphasis">dnotify</span> can be found under the description of the <tt>F_NOTIFY</tt> operation in the <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl(2)</span> manual page, and in the kernel source file <tt>Documentation/dnotify.txt</tt>.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
