<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>20.1. Concepts and Overview</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">20.1. Concepts and Overview</h3><p class="docText">A <span class="docEmphasis">signal</span> is a notification to a process that an event has occurred. Signals are sometimes described as <span class="docEmphasis">software interrupts</span>.
 Signals are analogous to hardware interrupts in that they interrupt the
 normal flow of execution of a program; in most cases, it is not 
possible to predict exactly when a signal will arrive.</p><p class="docText">One
 process can (if it has suitable permissions) send a signal to another 
process. In this use, signals can be employed as a synchronization 
technique, or even as a primitive form of interprocess communication 
(IPC). It is also possible for a process to send a signal to itself. 
However, the usual source of many signals sent to a process is the 
kernel. Among the types of events that cause the kernel to generate a 
signal for a process are the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">A
 hardware exception occurred, meaning that the hardware detected a fault
 condition that was notified to the kernel, which in turn sent a 
corresponding signal to the process concerned. Examples of hardware 
exceptions include executing a malformed machine-language instruction, 
dividing by 0, or referencing a part of memory that is inaccessible.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The user typed one of the terminal special characters that generate signals. These characters include the <span class="docEmphasis">interrupt</span> character (usually <span class="docEmphasis">Control-C</span>) and the <span class="docEmphasis">suspend</span> character (usually <span class="docEmphasis">Control-Z</span>).</p></li><li><p class="docList">A
 software event occurred. For example, input became available on a file 
descriptor, the terminal window was resized, a timer went off, the 
process’s CPU time limit was exceeded, or a child of this process 
terminated.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Each signal is defined as a unique (small) integer, starting sequentially from 1. These integers are defined in <tt>&lt;signal.h&gt;</tt> with symbolic names of the form <tt>SIGxxxx</tt>.
 Since the actual numbers used for each signal vary across 
implementations, it is these symbolic names that are always used in 
programs. For example, when the user types the <span class="docEmphasis">interrupt</span> character, <tt>SIGINT</tt> (signal number 2) is delivered to a process.</p><p class="docText">Signals fall into two broad categories. The first set constitutes the <span class="docEmphasis">traditional</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">standard</span>
 signals, which are used by the kernel to notify processes of events. On
 Linux, the standard signals are numbered from 1 to 31. We describe the 
standard signals in this chapter. The other set of signals consists of 
the <span class="docEmphasis">realtime</span> signals, whose differences from standard signals are described in Section 22.8.</p><p class="docText">A signal is said to be <span class="docEmphasis">generated</span> by some event. Once generated, a signal is later <span class="docEmphasis">delivered</span>
 to a process, which then takes some action in response to the signal. 
Between the time it is generated and the time it is delivered, a signal 
is said to be <span class="docEmphasis">pending</span>.</p><p class="docText">Normally,
 a pending signal is delivered to a process as soon as it is next 
scheduled to run, or immediately if the process is already running 
(e.g., if the process sent a signal to itself). Sometimes, however, we 
need to ensure that a segment of code is not interrupted by the delivery
 of a signal. To do this, we can add a signal to the process’s <span class="docEmphasis">signal mask</span>—a set of signals whose delivery is currently <span class="docEmphasis">blocked</span>.
 If a signal is generated while it is blocked, it remains pending until 
it is later unblocked (removed from the signal mask). Various system 
calls allow a process to add and remove signals from its signal mask.</p><p class="docText">Upon delivery of a signal, a process carries out one of the following default actions, depending on the signal:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The signal is <span class="docEmphasis">ignored</span>; that is, it is discarded by the kernel and has no effect on the process. (The process never even knows that it occurred.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">The process is <span class="docEmphasis">terminated</span> (killed). This is sometimes referred to as <span class="docEmphasis">abnormal process termination</span>, as opposed to the normal process termination that occurs when a process terminates using <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A <span class="docEmphasis">core dump file</span>
 is generated, and the process is terminated. A core dump file contains 
an image of the virtual memory of the process, which can be loaded into a
 debugger in order to inspect the state of the process at the time that 
it terminated.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The process is <span class="docEmphasis">stopped</span>—execution of the process is suspended.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Execution of the process is <span class="docEmphasis">resumed</span> after previously being stopped.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Instead
 of accepting the default for a particular signal, a program can change 
the action that occurs when the signal is delivered. This is known as 
setting the <span class="docEmphasis">disposition</span> of the signal. A program can set one of the following dispositions for a signal:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">default action</span> should occur. This is useful to undo an earlier change of the disposition of the signal to something other than its default.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The signal is <span class="docEmphasis">ignored</span>. This is useful for a signal whose default action would be to terminate the process.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A <span class="docEmphasis">signal handler</span> is executed.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">A
 signal handler is a function, written by the programmer, that performs 
appropriate tasks in response to the delivery of a signal. For example, 
the shell has a handler for the <tt>SIGINT</tt> signal (generated by the <span class="docEmphasis">interrupt</span> character, <span class="docEmphasis">Control-C</span>)
 that causes it to stop what it is currently doing and return control to
 the main input loop, so that the user is once more presented with the 
shell prompt. Notifying the kernel that a handler function should be 
invoked is usually referred to as <span class="docEmphasis">installing</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">establishing</span> a signal handler. When a signal handler is invoked in response to the delivery of a signal, we say that the signal has been <span class="docEmphasis">handled</span> or, synonymously, <span class="docEmphasis">caught</span>.</p><p class="docText">Note that it isn’t possible to set the disposition of a signal to <span class="docEmphasis">terminate</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">dump core</span>
 (unless one of these is the default disposition of the signal). The 
nearest we can get to this is to install a handler for the signal that 
then calls either <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">abort()</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">abort()</span> function (Section 21.2.2) generates a <tt>SIGABRT</tt> signal for the process, which causes it to dump core and terminate.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The Linux-specific <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/status</tt>
 file contains various bit-mask fields that can be inspected to 
determine a process’s treatment of signals. The bit masks are displayed 
as hexadecimal numbers, with the least significant bit representing 
signal 1, the next bit to the left representing signal 2, and so on. 
These fields are <span class="docEmphasis">SigPnd</span> (per-thread pending signals), <span class="docEmphasis">ShdPnd</span> (process-wide pending signals; since Linux 2.6), <span class="docEmphasis">SigBlk</span> (blocked signals), <span class="docEmphasis">SigIgn</span> (ignored signals), and <span class="docEmphasis">SigCgt</span> (caught signals). (The difference between the <span class="docEmphasis">SigPnd</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ShdPnd</span>
 fields will become clear when we describe the handling of signals in 
multithreaded processes in Section 33.2.) The same information can also 
be obtained using various options to the <span class="docEmphasis">ps(1)</span> command.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Signals
 appeared in very early UNIX implementations, but have gone through some
 significant changes since their inception. In early implementations, 
signals could be lost (i.e., not delivered to the target process) in 
certain circumstances. Furthermore, although facilities were provided to
 block delivery of signals while critical code was executed, in some 
circumstances, blocking was not reliable. These problems were remedied 
in 4.2BSD, which provided so-called <span class="docEmphasis">reliable signals</span>.
 (One further BSD innovation was the addition of extra signals to 
support shell job control, which we describe in Section 34.7.)</p><p class="docText">System
 V also added reliable semantics to signals, but employed a model 
incompatible with BSD. These incompatibilities were resolved only with 
the arrival of the POSIX.1-1990 standard, which adopted a specification 
for reliable signals largely based on the BSD model.</p><p class="docText">We consider the details of reliable and unreliable signals in Section 22.7, and briefly describe the older BSD and System V signal APIs in Section 22.13.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
