<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>20.2. Signal Types and Default Actions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">20.2. Signal Types and Default Actions</h3><p class="docText">Earlier, we mentioned that the standard signals are numbered from 1 to 31 on Linux. However, the Linux <span class="docEmphasis">signal(7)</span>
 manual page lists more than 31 signal names. The excess names can be 
accounted for in a variety of ways. Some of the names are simply 
synonyms for other names, and are defined for source compatibility with 
other UNIX implementations. Other names are defined but unused. The 
following list describes the various signals:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGABRT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">A process is sent this signal when it calls the <span class="docEmphasis">abort()</span> function (Section 21.2.2). By default, this signal terminates the process with a core dump. This achieves the intended purpose of the <span class="docEmphasis">abort()</span> call: to produce a core dump for debugging.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGALRM</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The kernel generates this signal upon the expiration of a real-time timer set by a call to <span class="docEmphasis">alarm()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">setitimer()</span>.
 A real-time timer is one that counts according to wall clock time 
(i.e., the human notion of elapsed time). For further details, see 
Section 23.1.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGBUS</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This
 signal (“bus error”) is generated to indicate certain kinds of 
memory-access errors. One such error can occur when using memory 
mappings created with <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span>, if we attempt to access an address that lies beyond the end of the underlying memory-mapped file, as described in Section 49.4.3.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGCHLD</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This signal is sent (by the kernel) to a parent process when one of its children terminates (either by calling <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>
 or as a result of being killed by a signal). It may also be sent to a 
process when one of its children is stopped or resumed by a signal. We 
consider <tt>SIGCHLD</tt> in detail in Section 26.3.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGCLD</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is a synonym for <tt>SIGCHLD</tt>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGCONT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">When
 sent to a stopped process, this signal causes the process to resume 
(i.e., to be rescheduled to run at some later time). When received by a 
process that is not currently stopped, this signal is ignored by 
default. A process may catch this signal, so that it carries out some 
action when it resumes. This signal is covered in more detail in Section 22.2 and Section 34.7.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGEMT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">In
 UNIX systems generally, this signal is used to indicate an 
implementation-dependent hardware error. On Linux, this signal is used 
only in the Sun SPARC implementation. The suffix <tt>EMT</tt> derives from <span class="docEmphasis">emulator trap</span>, an assembler mnemonic on the Digital PDP-11.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGFPE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This signal is generated for certain types of arithmetic errors, such as divide-by-zero. The suffix <tt>FPE</tt> is an abbreviation for <span class="docEmphasis">floating-point exception</span>,
 although this signal can also be generated for integer arithmetic 
errors. The precise details of when this signal is generated depend on 
the hardware architecture and the settings of CPU control registers. For
 example, on x86-32, integer divide-by-zero always yields a <tt>SIGFPE</tt>, but the handling of floating-point divide-by-zero depends on whether the <tt>FE_DIVBYZERO</tt> exception has been enabled. If this exception is enabled (using <span class="docEmphasis">feenableexcept()</span>), then a floating-point divide-by-zero generates <tt>SIGFPE</tt>; otherwise, it yields the IEEE-standard result for the operands (a floating-point representation of infinity). See the <span class="docEmphasis">fenv(3)</span> manual page and <tt>&lt;fenv.h&gt;</tt> for further information.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGHUP</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">When
 a terminal disconnect (hangup) occurs, this signal is sent to the 
controlling process of the terminal. We describe the concept of a 
controlling process and the various circumstances in which <tt>SIGHUP</tt> is sent in Section 34.6. A second use of <tt>SIGHUP</tt> is with daemons (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">init</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">httpd</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span>). Many daemons are designed to respond to the receipt of <tt>SIGHUP</tt>
 by reinitializing themselves and rereading their configuration files. 
The system administrator triggers these actions by manually sending <tt>SIGHUP</tt> to the daemon, either by using an explicit <span class="docEmphasis">kill</span> command or by executing a program or script that does the same.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGILL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This signal is sent to a process if it tries to execute an illegal (i.e., incorrectly formed) machine-language instruction.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGINFO</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">On Linux, this signal name is a synonym for <tt>SIGPWR</tt>. On BSD systems, the <tt>SIGINFO</tt> signal, generated by typing <span class="docEmphasis">Control-T</span>, is used to obtain status information about the foreground process group.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGINT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">When the user types the terminal <span class="docEmphasis">interrupt</span> character (usually <span class="docEmphasis">Control-C</span>),
 the terminal driver sends this signal to the foreground process group. 
The default action for this signal is to terminate the process.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGIO</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Using the <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>
 system call, it is possible to arrange for this signal to be generated 
when an I/O event (e.g., input becoming available) occurs on certain 
types of open file descriptors, such as those for terminals and sockets.
 This feature is described further in Section 63.3.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGIOT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">On Linux, this is a synonym for <tt>SIGABRT</tt>. On some other UNIX implementations, this signal indicates an implementation-defined hardware fault.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGKILL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is the sure <span class="docEmphasis">kill</span> signal. It can’t be blocked, ignored, or caught by a handler, and thus always terminates a process.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGLOST</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This
 signal name exists on Linux, but is unused. On some other UNIX 
implementations, the NFS client sends this signal to local processes 
holding locks if the NSF client fails to regain locks held by the those 
processes following the recovery of a remote NFS server that crashed. 
(This feature is not standardized in NFS specifications.)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGPIPE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This
 signal is generated when a process tries to write to a pipe, a FIFO, or
 a socket for which there is no corresponding reader process. This 
normally occurs because the reading process has closed its file 
descriptor for the IPC channel. See Section 44.2 for further details.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGPOLL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This signal, which is derived from System V, is a synonym for <tt>SIGIO</tt> on Linux.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGPROF</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The kernel generates this signal upon the expiration of a profiling timer set by a call to <span class="docEmphasis">setitimer()</span> (Section 23.1). A profiling timer is one that counts the CPU time used by a process. Unlike a virtual timer (see <tt>SIGVTALRM</tt> below), a profiling timer counts CPU time used in both user mode and kernel mode.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGPWR</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is the <span class="docEmphasis">power failure</span>
 signal. On systems that have an uninterruptible power supply (UPS), it 
is possible to set up a daemon process that monitors the backup battery 
level in the event of a power failure. If the battery power is about to 
run out (after an extended power outage), then the monitoring process 
sends <tt>SIGPWR</tt> to the <span class="docEmphasis">init</span> process, which interprets this signal as a request to shut down the system in a quick and orderly fashion.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGQUIT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">When the user types the <span class="docEmphasis">quit</span> character (usually <span class="docEmphasis">Control-\</span>)
 on the keyboard, this signal is sent to the foreground process group. 
By default, this signal terminates a process and causes it to produce a 
core dump, which can then be used for debugging. Using <tt>SIGQUIT</tt> in this manner is useful with a program that is stuck in an infinite loop or is otherwise not responding. By typing <span class="docEmphasis">Control-\</span> and then loading the resulting core dump with the <span class="docEmphasis">gdb</span> debugger and using the <span class="docEmphasis">backtrace</span>
 command to obtain a stack trace, we can find out which part of the 
program code was executing. ([Matloff, 2008] describes the use of <span class="docEmphasis">gdb</span>.)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGSEGV</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This
 very popular signal is generated when a program makes an invalid memory
 reference. A memory reference may be invalid because the referenced 
page doesn’t exist (e.g., it lies in an unmapped area somewhere between 
the heap and the stack), the process tried to update a location in 
read-only memory (e.g., the program text segment or a region of mapped 
memory marked read-only), or the process tried to access a part of 
kernel memory while running in user mode (Section 2.1).
 In C, these events often result from dereferencing a pointer containing
 a bad address (e.g., an uninitialized pointer) or passing an invalid 
argument in a function call. The name of this signal derives from the 
term <span class="docEmphasis">segmentation violation</span>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGSTKFLT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Documented in <span class="docEmphasis">signal(7)</span> as “stack fault on coprocessor,” this signal is defined, but is unused on Linux.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGSTOP</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is the <span class="docEmphasis">sure stop</span> signal. It can’t be blocked, ignored, or caught by a handler; thus, it always stops a process.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGSYS</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This
 signal is generated if a process makes a “bad” system call. This means 
that the process executed an instruction that was interpreted as a 
system call trap, but the associated system call number was not valid 
(refer to Section 3.1).</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGTERM</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is the standard signal used for terminating a process and is the default signal sent by the <span class="docEmphasis">kill</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">killall</span> commands. Users sometimes explicitly send the <tt>SIGKILL</tt> signal to a process using <span class="docEmphasis">kill -KILL</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">kill -9</span>. However, this is generally a mistake. A well-designed application will have a handler for <tt>SIGTERM</tt>
 that causes the application to exit gracefully, cleaning up temporary 
files and releasing other resources beforehand. Killing a process with <tt>SIGKILL</tt> bypasses the <tt>SIGTERM</tt> handler. Thus, we should always first attempt to terminate a process using <tt>SIGTERM</tt>, and reserve <tt>SIGKILL</tt> as a last resort for killing runaway processes that don’t respond to <tt>SIGTERM</tt>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGTRAP</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This signal is used to implement debugger breakpoints and system call tracing, as performed by <span class="docEmphasis">strace(1)</span> (Appendix A). See the <span class="docEmphasis">ptrace(2)</span> manual page for further information.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGTSTP</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is the job-control <span class="docEmphasis">stop</span> signal, sent to stop the foreground process group when the user types the <span class="docEmphasis">suspend</span> character (usually <span class="docEmphasis">Control-Z</span>) on the keyboard. Chapter 34
 describes process groups (jobs) and job control in detail, as well as 
details of when and how a program may need to handle this signal. The 
name of this signal derives from “terminal stop.”</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGTTIN</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">When running under a job-control shell, the terminal driver sends this signal to a background process group when it attempts to <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> from the terminal. This signal stops a process by default.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGTTOU</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This signal serves an analogous purpose to <tt>SIGTTIN</tt>, but for terminal output by background jobs. When running under a job-control shell, if the <tt>TOSTOP</tt> (<span class="docEmphasis">terminal output stop</span>) option has been enabled for the terminal (perhaps via the command <span class="docEmphasis">stty tostop</span>), the terminal driver sends <tt>SIGTTOU</tt> to a background process group when it attempts to <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> to the terminal (see Section 34.7.1). This signal stops a process by default.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGUNUSED</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">As the name implies, this signal is unused. On Linux 2.4 and later, this signal name is synonymous with <tt>SIGSYS</tt>
 on many architectures. In other words, this signal number is no longer 
unused on those architectures, although the signal name remains for 
backward compatibility.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGURG</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This signal is sent to a process to indicate the presence of <span class="docEmphasis">out-of-band</span> (also known as <span class="docEmphasis">urgent</span>) data on a socket (Section 61.13.1).</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGUSR1</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This signal and <tt>SIGUSR2</tt>
 are available for programmer-defined purposes. The kernel never 
generates these signals for a process. Processes may use these signals 
to notify one another of events or to synchronize with each other. In 
early UNIX implementations, these were the only two signals that could 
be freely used in applications. (In fact, processes can send one another
 any signal, but this has the potential for confusion if the kernel also
 generates one of the signals for a process.) Modern UNIX 
implementations provide a large set of realtime signals that are also 
available for programmer-defined purposes (Section 22.8).</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGUSR2</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">See the description of <tt>SIGUSR1</tt>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGVTALRM</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The kernel generates this signal upon expiration of a virtual timer set by a call to <span class="docEmphasis">setitimer()</span> (Section 23.1). A virtual timer is one that counts the user-mode CPU time used by a process.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGWINCH</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">In
 a windowing environment, this signal is sent to the foreground process 
group when the terminal window size changes (as a consequence either of 
the user manually resizing it, or of a program resizing it via a call to
 <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span>, as described in Section 62.9). By installing a handler for this signal, programs such as <span class="docEmphasis">vi</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">less</span> can know to redraw their output after a change in window size.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGXCPU</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This signal is sent to a process when it exceeds its CPU time resource limit (<tt>RLIMIT_CPU</tt>, described in Section 36.3).</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIGXFSZ</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This signal is sent to a process if it attempts (using <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">truncate()</span>) to increase the size of a file beyond the process’s file size resource limit (<tt>RLIMIT_FSIZE</tt>, described in Section 36.3).</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">Table 20-1 summarizes a range of information about signals on Linux. Note the following points about this table:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">signal number</span>
 column shows the number assigned to this signal on various hardware 
architectures. Except where otherwise indicated, signals have the same 
number on all architectures. Architectural differences in signal numbers
 are indicated in parentheses, and occur on the Sun SPARC and SPARC64 
(S), HP/Compaq/Digital Alpha (A), MIPS (M), and HP PA-RISC (P) 
architectures. In this column, <span class="docEmphasis">undef</span> indicates that a symbol is undefined on the indicated architectures.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">SUSv3</span> column indicates whether the signal is standardized in SUSv3.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">Default</span> column indicates the default action of the signal: <span class="docEmphasis">term</span> means that the signal terminates the process, <span class="docEmphasis">core</span> means that the process produces a core dump file and terminates, <span class="docEmphasis">ignore</span> means that the signal is ignored, <span class="docEmphasis">stop</span> means that the signal stops the process, and <span class="docEmphasis">cont</span> means that the signal resumes a stopped process.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Certain of the signals listed previously are not shown in Table 20-1: <tt>SIGCLD</tt> (synonym for <tt>SIGCHLD</tt>), <tt>SIGINFO</tt> (unused), <tt>SIGIOT</tt> (synonym for <tt>SIGABRT</tt>), <tt>SIGLOST</tt> (unused), and <tt>SIGUNUSED</tt> (synonym for <tt>SIGSYS</tt> on many architectures).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 20-1. Linux signals</h5></caption><colgroup span="5"><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Name</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Signal number</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Description</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">SUSv3</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Default</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGABRT</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">6</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Abort process</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">core</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGALRM</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">14</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Real-time timer expired</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">term</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGBUS</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">7 (SAMP=10)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Memory access error</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">core</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGCHLD</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">17 (SA=20, MP=18)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Child terminated or stopped</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">ignore</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGCONT</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">18 (SA=19, M=25, P=26)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Continue if stopped</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">cont</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGEMT</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">undef (SAMP=7)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Hardware fault</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">term</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGFPE</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">8</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Arithmetic exception</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">core</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGHUP</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">1</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Hangup</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">term</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGILL</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">4</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Illegal instruction</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">core</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGINT</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">2</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Terminal interrupt</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">term</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGIO</tt>/<tt>SIGPOLL</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">29 (SA=23, MP=22)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">I/O possible</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">term</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGKILL</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">9</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Sure kill</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">term</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGPIPE</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">13</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Broken pipe</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">term</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGPROF</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">27 (M=29, P=21)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Profiling timer expired</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">term</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGPWR</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">30 (SA=29, MP=19)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Power about to fail</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">term</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGQUIT</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">3</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Terminal quit</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">core</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGSEGV</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">11</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Invalid memory reference</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">core</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGSTKFLT</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">16 (SAM=undef, P=36)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Stack fault on coprocessor</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">term</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGSTOP</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">19 (SA=17, M=23, P=24)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Sure stop</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">stop</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGSYS</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">31 (SAMP=12)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Invalid system call</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">core</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGTERM</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">15</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Terminate process</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">term</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGTRAP</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">5</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Trace/breakpoint trap</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">core</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGTSTP</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">20 (SA=18, M=24, P=25)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Terminal stop</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">stop</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGTTIN</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">21 (M=26, P=27)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Terminal read from BG</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">stop</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGTTOU</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">22 (M=27, P=28)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Terminal write from BG</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">stop</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGURG</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">23 (SA=16, M=21, P=29)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Urgent data on socket</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">ignore</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGUSR1</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">10 (SA=30, MP=16)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">User-defined signal 1</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">term</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGUSR2</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">12 (SA=31, MP=17)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">User-defined signal 2</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">term</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGVTALRM</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">26 (M=28, P=20)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Virtual timer expired</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">term</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGWINCH</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">28 (M=20, P=23)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Terminal window size change</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">ignore</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGXCPU</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">24 (M=30, P=33)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">CPU time limit exceeded</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">core</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGXFSZ</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">25 (M=31, P=34)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">File size limit exceeded</td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">core</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">Note the following points regarding the default behavior shown for certain signals in Table 20-1:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">On Linux 2.2, the default action for the signals <tt>SIGXCPU</tt>, <tt>SIGXFSZ</tt>, <tt>SIGSYS</tt>, and <tt>SIGBUS</tt>
 is to terminate the process without producing a core dump. From kernel 
2.4 onward, Linux conforms to the requirements of SUSv3, with these 
signals causing termination with a core dump. On several other UNIX 
implementations, <tt>SIGXCPU</tt> and <tt>SIGXFSZ</tt> are treated in the same way as on Linux 2.2.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>SIGPWR</tt> is typically ignored by default on those other UNIX implementations where it appears.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>SIGIO</tt> is ignored by default on several UNIX implementations (particularly BSD derivatives).</p></li><li><p class="docList">Although not specified by any standards, <tt>SIGEMT</tt>
 appears on most UNIX implementations. However, this signal typically 
results in termination with a core dump on other implementations.</p></li><li><p class="docList">In SUSv1, the default action for <tt>SIGURG</tt>
 was specified as process termination, and this is the default in some 
older UNIX implementations. SUSv2 adopted the current specification 
(ignore).</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
