<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>20.3. Changing Signal Dispositions: signal()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">20.3. Changing Signal Dispositions: <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span></h3><p class="docText">UNIX systems provide two ways of changing the disposition of a signal: <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span>
 system call, which is described in this section, was the original API 
for setting the disposition of a signal, and it provides a simpler 
interface than <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span>. On the other hand, <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span> provides functionality that is not available with <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span>. Furthermore, there are variations in the behavior of <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span> across UNIX implementations (Section 22.7),
 which mean that it should never be used for establishing signal 
handlers in portable programs. Because of these portability issues, <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span> is the (strongly) preferred API for establishing a signal handler. After we explain the use of <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span> in Section 20.13, we’ll always employ that call when establishing signal handlers in our example programs.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Although documented in section 2 of the Linux manual pages, <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span> is actually implemented in <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> as a library function layered on top of the <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span> system call.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><pre>#include &lt;signal.h&gt;

void ( *<b>signal</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span>, void (*<span class="docEmphasis">handler</span>)(int)) ) (int);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns previous signal disposition on success, or <tt>SIG_ERR</tt> on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The function prototype for <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span> requires some decoding. The first argument, <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span><a name="second argument"></a>, identifies the signal whose disposition we wish to change. The second argument, <span class="docEmphasis">handler</span>, is the address of the function that should be called when this signal is delivered. This function returns nothing (<span class="docEmphasis">void</span>) and takes one integer argument. Thus, a signal handler has the following general form:</p><pre>void
handler(int sig)
{
    /* Code for the handler */
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We describe the purpose of the <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span> argument to the handler function in Section 20.4.</p><p class="docText">The return value of <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span> is the previous disposition of the signal. Like the <span class="docEmphasis">handler</span>
 argument, this is a pointer to a function returning nothing and taking 
one integer argument. In other words, we could write code such as the 
following to temporarily establish a handler for a signal, and then 
reset the disposition of the signal to whatever it was previously:</p><pre>void (*oldHandler)(int);

oldHandler = signal(SIGINT, newHandler);
if (oldHandler == SIG_ERR)
    errExit("signal");

/* Do something else here. During this time, if SIGINT is
   delivered, newHandler will be used to handle the signal. */

if (signal(SIGINT, oldHandler) == SIG_ERR)
    errExit("signal");</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">It is not possible to use <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span> to retrieve the current disposition of a signal without at the same time changing that disposition. To do that, we must use <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">We can make the prototype for <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span> much more comprehensible by using the following type definition for a pointer to a signal handler function:</p><pre>typedef void (*sighandler_t)(int);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This enables us to rewrite the prototype for <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span> as follows:</p><pre>sighandler_t signal(int sig, sighandler_t handler);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">If the <tt>_GNU_SOURCE</tt> feature test macro is defined, then <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> exposes the nonstandard <span class="docEmphasis">sighandler_t</span> data type in the <tt>&lt;signal.h&gt;</tt> header file.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Instead of specifying the address of a function as the <span class="docEmphasis">handler</span> argument of <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span>, we can specify one of the following values:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIG_DFL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Reset the disposition of the signal to its default (Table 20-1). This is useful for undoing the effect of an earlier call to <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span> that changed the disposition for the signal.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIG_IGN</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Ignore
 the signal. If the signal is generated for this process, the kernel 
silently discards it. The process never even knows that the signal 
occurred.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">A successful call to <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span>
 returns the previous disposition of the signal, which may be the 
address of a previously installed handler function, or one of the 
constants <tt>SIG_DFL</tt> or <tt>SIG_IGN</tt>. On error, <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span> returns the value <tt>SIG_ERR</tt>.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
