<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>20.6. Checking for the Existence of a Process</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">20.6. Checking for the Existence of a Process</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span> system call can serve another purpose. If the <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span> argument is specified as 0 (the so-called <span class="docEmphasis">null signal</span>), then no signal is sent. Instead, <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span>
 merely performs error checking to see if the process can be signaled. 
Read another way, this means we can use the null signal to test if a 
process with a specific process ID exists. If sending a null signal 
fails with the error <tt>ESRCH</tt>, then we know the process doesn’t exist. If the call fails with the error <tt>EPERM</tt>
 (meaning the process exists, but we don’t have permission to send a 
signal to it) or succeeds (meaning we do have permission to send a 
signal to the process), then we know that the process exists.</p><p class="docText">Verifying
 the existence of a particular process ID doesn’t guarantee that a 
particular program is still running. Because the kernel recycles process
 IDs as processes are born and die, the same process ID may, over time, 
refer to a different process. Furthermore, a particular process ID may 
exist, but be a zombie (i.e., a process that has died, but whose parent 
has not yet performed a <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span> to obtain its termination status, as described in Section 26.2).</p><p class="docText">Various other techniques can also be used to check whether a particular process is running, including the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">The wait() system calls</span>: These calls are described in Chapter 26. They can be employed only if the monitored process is a child of the caller.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Semaphores and exclusive file locks</span>:
 If the process that is being monitored continuously holds a semaphore 
or a file lock, then, if we can acquire the semaphore or lock, we know 
the process has terminated. We describe semaphores in Chapter 47 and Chapter 53 and file locks in Chapter 55.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">IPC channels such as pipes and FIFOs</span>:
 We set up the monitored process so that it holds a file descriptor open
 for writing on the channel as long as it is alive. Meanwhile, the 
monitoring process holds open a read descriptor for the channel, and it 
knows that the monitored process has terminated when the write end of 
the channel is closed (because it sees end-of-file). The monitoring 
process can determine this either by reading from its file descriptor or
 by monitoring the descriptor using one of the techniques described in Chapter 63.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">The</span> <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID interface</span>: For example, if a process with the process ID 12345 exists, then the directory <tt>/proc/12345</tt> will exist, and we can check this using a call such as <span class="docEmphasis">stat()</span>.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">All of these techniques, except the last, are unaffected by recycling of process IDs.</p><p class="docText">Example 20-3 demonstrates the use of <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span>. This program takes two command-line arguments, a signal number and a process ID, and uses <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span>
 to send the signal to the specified process. If signal 0 (the null 
signal) is specified, then the program reports on the existence of the 
target process.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
