<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>20.7. Other Ways of Sending Signals: raise() and killpg()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">20.7. Other Ways of Sending Signals: <span class="docEmphasis">raise()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">killpg()</span></h3><p class="docText">Sometimes, it is useful for a process to send a signal to itself. (We see an example of this in Section 34.7.3.) The <span class="docEmphasis">raise()</span> function performs this task.</p><pre>#include &lt;signal.h&gt;

int <b>raise</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or nonzero on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">In a single-threaded program, a call to <span class="docEmphasis">raise()</span> is equivalent to the following call to <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span>:</p><pre>kill(getpid(), sig);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">On a system that supports threads, <span class="docEmphasis">raise(sig)</span> is implemented as:</p><pre>pthread_kill(pthread_self(), sig)</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We describe the <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_kill()</span> function in Section 33.2.3,
 but for now it is sufficient to say that this implementation means that
 the signal will be delivered to the specific thread that called <span class="docEmphasis">raise()</span>. By contrast, the call <span class="docEmphasis">kill(getpid(), sig)</span> sends a signal to the calling <span class="docEmphasis">process</span>, and that signal may be delivered to any thread in the process.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">raise()</span> function originates from C89. The C standards don’t cover operating system details such as process IDs, but <span class="docEmphasis">raise()</span> can be specified within the C standard because it doesn’t require reference to process IDs.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">When a process sends itself a signal using <span class="docEmphasis">raise()</span> (or <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span>), the signal is delivered immediately (i.e., before <span class="docEmphasis">raise()</span> returns to the caller).</p><p class="docText">Note that <span class="docEmphasis">raise()</span> returns a nonzero value (not necessarily -1) on error. The only error that can occur with <span class="docEmphasis">raise()</span> is <tt>EINVAL</tt>, because <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span> was invalid. Therefore, where we specify one of the <tt>SIGxxxx</tt> constants, we don’t check the return status of this function.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EXLAK">Example 20-3. Using the <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span> system call</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>signals/t_kill.c</b>
#include &lt;signal.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int s, sig;

    if (argc != 3 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s sig-num pid\n", argv[0]);

    sig = getInt(argv[2], 0, "sig-num");

    s = kill(getLong(argv[1], 0, "pid"), sig);

    if (sig != 0) {
        if (s == -1)
            errExit("kill");

    } else {                    /* Null signal: process existence check */
        if (s == 0) {
            printf("Process exists and we can send it a signal\n");
        } else {
            if (errno == EPERM)
                printf("Process exists, but we don't have "
                       "permission to send it a signal\n");
            else if (errno == ESRCH)
                printf("Process does not exist\n");
            else
                errExit("kill");
        }
    }

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
      <b>signals/t_kill.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">killpg()</span> function sends a signal to all of the members of a process group.</p><pre>#include &lt;signal.h&gt;

int <b>killpg</b>(pid_t <span class="docEmphasis">pgrp</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">A call to <span class="docEmphasis">killpg()</span> is equivalent to the following call to <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span>:</p><pre>kill(-pgrp, sig);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If <span class="docEmphasis">pgrp</span>
 is specified as 0, then the signal is sent to all processes in the same
 process group as the caller. SUSv3 leaves this point unspecified, but 
most UNIX implementations interpret this case in the same way as Linux.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
