<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>20.9. Signal Sets</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">20.9. Signal Sets</h3><p class="docText">Many signal-related system calls need to be able to represent a group of different signals. For example, <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sigprocmask()</span> allow a program to specify a group of signals that are to be blocked by a process, while <span class="docEmphasis">sigpending()</span> returns a group of signals that are currently pending for a process. (We describe these system calls shortly.)</p><p class="docText">Multiple signals are represented using a data structure called a <span class="docEmphasis">signal set</span>, provided by the system data type <span class="docEmphasis">sigset_t</span>. SUSv3 specifies a range of functions for manipulating signal sets, and we now describe these functions.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On Linux, as on most UNIX implementations, the <span class="docEmphasis">sigset_t</span>
 data type is a bit mask. However, SUSv3 doesn’t require this. A signal 
set could conceivably be represented using some other kind of structure.
 SUSv3 requires only that the type of <span class="docEmphasis">sigset_t</span>
 be assignable. Thus, it must be implemented using either some scalar 
type (e.g., an integer) or a C structure (perhaps containing an array of
 integers).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sigemptyset()</span> function initializes a signal set to contain no members. The <span class="docEmphasis">sigfillset()</span> function initializes a set to contain all signals (including all realtime signals).</p><pre>#include &lt;signal.h&gt;

int <b>sigemptyset</b>(sigset_t *<span class="docEmphasis">set</span>);
int <b>sigfillset</b>(sigset_t *<span class="docEmphasis">set</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Both return 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">One of <span class="docEmphasis">sigemptyset()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">sigaddset() must</span>
 be used to initialize a signal set. This is because C doesn’t 
initialize automatic variables, and the initialization of static 
variables to 0 can’t portably be relied upon as indicating an empty 
signal set, since signal sets may be implemented using structures other 
than bit masks. (For the same reason, it is incorrect to use <span class="docEmphasis">memset(3)</span> to zero the contents of a signal set in order to mark it as empty.)</p><p class="docText">After initialization, individual signals can be added to a set using <span class="docEmphasis">sigaddset()</span> and removed using <span class="docEmphasis">sigdelset()</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;signal.h&gt;

int <b>sigaddset</b>(sigset_t *<span class="docEmphasis">set</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span>);
int <b>sigdelset</b>(sigset_t *<span class="docEmphasis">set</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Both return 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">For both <span class="docEmphasis">sigaddset()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sigdelset()</span>, the <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span> argument is a signal number.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sigismember()</span> function is used to test for membership of a set.</p><pre>#include &lt;signal.h&gt;

int <b>sigismember</b>(const sigset_t *<span class="docEmphasis">set</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 1 if <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span> is a member of <span class="docEmphasis">set</span>, otherwise 0</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sigismember()</span> function returns 1 (true) if <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span> is a member of <span class="docEmphasis">set</span>, and 0 (false) otherwise.</p><p class="docText">The
 GNU C library implements three nonstandard functions that perform tasks
 that are complementary to the standard signal set functions just 
described.</p><pre>#define _GNU_SOURCE
#include &lt;signal.h&gt;

int <b>sigandset</b>(sigset_t *<span class="docEmphasis">dest</span>, sigset_t *<span class="docEmphasis">left</span>, sigset_t *<span class="docEmphasis">right</span>);
int <b>sigorset</b>(sigset_t *<span class="docEmphasis">dest</span>, sigset_t *<span class="docEmphasis">left</span>, sigset_t *<span class="docEmphasis">right</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Both return 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><pre>int <b>sigisemptyset</b>(const sigset_t *<span class="docEmphasis">set</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 1 if <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span> is empty, otherwise 0</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">These functions perform the following tasks:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">sigandset()</span> places the intersection of the sets <span class="docEmphasis">left</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">right</span> in the set <span class="docEmphasis">dest</span>;</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">sigorset()</span> places the union of the sets <span class="docEmphasis">left</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">right</span> in the set <span class="docEmphasis">dest</span>; and</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">sigisemptyset()</span> returns true if <span class="docEmphasis">set</span> contains no signals.</p></li></ul><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EMTAK">20.9.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EQTAK">20.9.1.1. Example program</h5><p class="docText">Using the functions described in this section, we can write the functions shown in Example 20-4, which we employ in various later programs. The first of these, <span class="docEmphasis">printSigset()</span>, displays the signals that are members of the specified signal set. This function uses the <tt>NSIG</tt> constant, which is defined in <tt>&lt;signal.h&gt;</tt> to be one greater than the highest signal number. We use <tt>NSIG</tt> as the upper bound in a loop that tests all signal numbers for membership of a set.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Although <tt>NSIG</tt>
 is not specified in SUSv3, it is defined on most UNIX implementations. 
However, it may be necessary to use implementation-specific compiler 
options to make it visible. For example, on Linux, we must define one of
 the feature test macros <tt>_BSD_SOURCE</tt>, <tt>_SVID_SOURCE</tt>, or <tt>_GNU_SOURCE</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">printSigMask()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">printPendingSigs()</span> functions employ <span class="docEmphasis">printSigset()</span> to display, respectively, the process signal mask and the set of currently pending signals. The <span class="docEmphasis">printSigMask()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">printPendingSigs()</span> functions use the <span class="docEmphasis">sigprocmask()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sigpending()</span> system calls, respectively. We describe the <span class="docEmphasis">sigprocmask()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sigpending()</span> system calls in Section 20.10 and Section 20.11.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ELXAK">Example 20-4. Functions for displaying signal sets</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>signals/signal_functions.c</b>
#define _GNU_SOURCE
#include &lt;string.h&gt;
#include &lt;signal.h&gt;
#include "signal_functions.h"           /* Declares functions defined here */
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

/* NOTE: All of the following functions employ fprintf(), which
   is not async-signal-safe (see Section 21.1.2). As such, these
   functions are also not async-signal-safe (i.e., beware of
   indiscriminately calling them from signal handlers). */

void                    /* Print list of signals within a signal set */
printSigset(FILE *of, const char *prefix, const sigset_t *sigset)
{
    int sig, cnt;

    cnt = 0;
    for (sig = 1; sig &lt; NSIG; sig++) {
        if (sigismember(sigset, sig)) {
            cnt++;
            fprintf(of, "%s%d (%s)\n", prefix, sig, strsignal(sig));
        }
    }

    if (cnt == 0)
        fprintf(of, "%s&lt;empty signal set&gt;\n", prefix);
}

int                     /* Print mask of blocked signals for this process */
printSigMask(FILE *of, const char *msg)
{
    sigset_t currMask;

    if (msg != NULL)
        fprintf(of, "%s", msg);

    if (sigprocmask(SIG_BLOCK, NULL, &amp;currMask) == -1)
        return -1;

    printSigset(of, "\t\t", &amp;currMask);

    return 0;
}

int                     /* Print signals currently pending for this process */
printPendingSigs(FILE *of, const char *msg)
{
    sigset_t pendingSigs;

    if (msg != NULL)
        fprintf(of, "%s", msg);

    if (sigpending(&amp;pendingSigs) == -1)
        return -1;

    printSigset(of, "\t\t", &amp;pendingSigs);

    return 0;
}      <b>signals/signal_functions.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
