<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>20.10. The Signal Mask (Blocking Signal Delivery)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">20.10. The Signal Mask (Blocking Signal Delivery)</h3><p class="docText">For each process, the kernel maintains a <span class="docEmphasis">signal mask</span>—a
 set of signals whose delivery to the process is currently blocked. If a
 signal that is blocked is sent to a process, delivery of that signal is
 delayed until it is unblocked by being removed from the process signal 
mask. (In Section 33.2.1,
 we’ll see that the signal mask is actually a per-thread attribute, and 
that each thread in a multithreaded process can independently examine 
and modify its signal mask using the <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_sigmask()</span> function.)</p><p class="docText">A signal may be added to the signal mask in the following ways:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">When
 a signal handler is invoked, the signal that caused its invocation can 
be automatically added to the signal mask. Whether or not this occurs 
depends on the flags used when the handler is established using <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">When a signal handler is established with <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span>, it is possible to specify an additional set of signals that are to be blocked when the handler is invoked.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">sigprocmask()</span> system call can be used at any time to explicitly add signals to, and remove signals from, the signal mask.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">We delay discussion of the first two cases until we examine <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span> in Section 20.13, and discuss <span class="docEmphasis">sigprocmask()</span> now.</p><pre>#include &lt;signal.h&gt;

int <b>sigprocmask</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">how</span>, const sigset_t *<span class="docEmphasis">set</span>, sigset_t *<span class="docEmphasis">oldset</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">We can use <span class="docEmphasis">sigprocmask()</span> to change the process signal mask, to retrieve the existing mask, or both. The <span class="docEmphasis">how</span> argument determines the changes that <span class="docEmphasis">sigprocmask()</span> makes to the signal mask:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIG_BLOCK</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The signals specified in the signal set pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">set</span> are added to the signal mask. In other words, the signal mask is set to the union of its current value and <span class="docEmphasis">set</span>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIG_UNBLOCK</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The signals in the signal set pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">set</span> are removed from the signal mask. Unblocking a signal that is not currently blocked doesn’t cause an error to be returned.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SIG_SETMASK</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The signal set pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">set</span> is assigned to the signal mask.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">In each case, if the <span class="docEmphasis">oldset</span> argument is not <tt>NULL</tt>, it points to a <span class="docEmphasis">sigset_t</span> buffer that is used to return the previous signal mask.</p><p class="docText">If we want to retrieve the signal mask without changing it, then we can specify <tt>NULL</tt> for the <span class="docEmphasis">set</span> argument, in which case the <span class="docEmphasis">how</span> argument is ignored.</p><p class="docText">To temporarily prevent delivery of a signal, we can use the series of calls shown in Example 20-5 to block the signal, and then unblock it by resetting the signal mask to its previous state.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EORAK">Example 20-5. Temporarily blocking delivery of a signal</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre>sigset_t blockSet, prevMask;

    /* Initialize a signal set to contain SIGINT */

    sigemptyset(&amp;blockSet);
    sigaddset(&amp;blockSet, SIGINT);

    /* Block SIGINT, save previous signal mask */

    if (sigprocmask(SIG_BLOCK, &amp;blockSet, &amp;prevMask) == -1)
        errExit("sigprocmask1");

    /* ... Code that should not be interrupted by SIGINT ... */

    /* Restore previous signal mask, unblocking SIGINT */

    if (sigprocmask(SIG_SETMASK, &amp;prevMask, NULL) == -1)
        errExit("sigprocmask2");</pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">SUSv3 specifies that if any pending signals are unblocked by a call to <span class="docEmphasis">sigprocmask()</span>,
 then at least one of those signals will be delivered before the call 
returns. In other words, if we unblock a pending signal, it is delivered
 to the process immediately.</p><p class="docText">Attempts to block <tt>SIGKILL</tt> and <tt>SIGSTOP</tt> are silently ignored. If we attempt to block these signals, <span class="docEmphasis">sigprocmask()</span> neither honors the request nor generates an error. This means that we can use the following code to block all signals except <tt>SIGKILL</tt> and <tt>SIGSTOP</tt>:</p><pre>sigfillset(&amp;blockSet);
if (sigprocmask(SIG_BLOCK, &amp;blockSet, NULL) == -1)
    errExit("sigprocmask");</pre><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
