<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>20.13. Changing Signal Dispositions: sigaction()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">20.13. Changing Signal Dispositions: <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span></h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span> system call is an alternative to <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span> for setting the disposition of a signal. Although <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span> is somewhat more complex to use than <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span>, in return it provides greater flexibility. In particular, <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span>
 allows us to retrieve the disposition of a signal without changing it, 
and to set various attributes controlling precisely what happens when a 
signal handler is invoked. Additionally, as we’ll elaborate in Section 22.7, <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span> is more portable than <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span> when establishing a signal handler.</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">#include &lt;signal.h&gt;

int <b>sigaction</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span>, const struct sigaction *<span class="docEmphasis">act</span>, struct sigaction *<span class="docEmphasis">oldact</span>);

					  </pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span> argument identifies the signal whose disposition we want to retrieve or change. This argument can be any signal except <tt>SIGKILL</tt> or <tt>SIGSTOP</tt>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">act</span>
 argument is a pointer to a structure specifying a new disposition for 
the signal. If we are interested only in finding the existing 
disposition of the signal, then we can specify <tt>NULL</tt> for this argument. The <span class="docEmphasis">oldact</span>
 argument is a pointer to a structure of the same type, and is used to 
return information about the signal’s previous disposition. If we are 
not interested in this information, then we can specify <tt>NULL</tt> for this argument. The structures pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">act</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">oldact</span> are of the following type:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">struct sigaction {
    void   (*sa_handler)(int);    /* Address of handler */
    sigset_t sa_mask;             /* Signals blocked during handler
                                     invocation */
    int      sa_flags;            /* Flags controlling handler invocation */
    void   (*sa_restorer)(void);  /* Not for application use */
};

					  </pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction</span> structure is actually somewhat more complex than shown here. We consider further details in Section 21.4.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sa_handler</span> field corresponds to the <span class="docEmphasis">handler</span> argument given to <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span>. It specifies the address of a signal handler, or one of the constants <tt>SIG_IGN</tt> or <tt>SIG_DFL</tt>. The <span class="docEmphasis">sa_mask</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sa_flags</span> fields, which we discuss in a moment, are interpreted only if <span class="docEmphasis">sa_handler</span> is the address of a signal handler—that is, a value other than <tt>SIG_IGN</tt> or <tt>SIG_DFL</tt>. The remaining field, <span class="docEmphasis">sa_restorer</span>, is not intended for use in applications (and is not specified by SUSv3).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sa_restorer</span> field is used internally to ensure that on completion of a signal handler, a call is made to the special-purpose <span class="docEmphasis">sigreturn()</span>
 system call, which restores the process’s execution context so that it 
can continue execution at the point where it was interrupted by the 
signal handler. An example of this usage can be found in the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> source file <tt>sysdeps/unix/sysv/linux/i386/sigaction.c</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sa_mask</span> field defines a set of signals that are to be blocked during invocation of the handler defined by <span class="docEmphasis">sa_handler</span>.
 When the signal handler is invoked, any signals in this set that are 
not currently part of the process signal mask are automatically added to
 the mask before the handler is called. These signals remain in the 
process signal mask until the signal handler returns, at which time they
 are automatically removed. The <span class="docEmphasis">sa_mask</span>
 field allows us to specify a set of signals that aren’t permitted to 
interrupt execution of this handler. In addition, the signal that caused
 the handler to be invoked is automatically added to the process signal 
mask. This means that a signal handler won’t recursively interrupt 
itself if a second instance of the same signal arrives while the handler
 is executing. Because blocked signals are not queued, if any of these 
signals are repeatedly generated during the execution of the handler, 
they are (later) delivered only once.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sa_flags</span> field is a bit mask specifying various options controlling how the signal is handled. The following bits may be ORed (<tt>|</tt>) together in this field:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SA_NOCLDSTOP</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">If <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span> is <tt>SIGCHLD</tt>, don’t generate this signal when a child process is stopped or resumed as a consequence of receiving a signal. Refer to Section 26.3.2.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SA_NOCLDWAIT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">(since Linux 2.6) If <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span> is <tt>SIGCHLD</tt>, don’t transform children into zombies when they terminate. For further details, see Section 26.3.3.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SA_NODEFER</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">When this signal is caught, don’t automatically add it to the process signal mask while the handler is executing. The name <tt>SA_NOMASK</tt> is provided as a historical synonym for <tt>SA_NODEFER</tt>, but the latter name is preferable because it is standardized in SUSv3.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SA_ONSTACK</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Invoke the handler for this signal using an alternate stack installed by <span class="docEmphasis">sigaltstack()</span>. Refer to Section 21.3.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SA_RESETHAND</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">When this signal is caught, reset its disposition to the default (i.e., <tt>SIG_DFL</tt>)
 before invoking the handler. (By default, a signal handler remains 
established until it is explicitly disestablished by a further call to <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span>.) The name <tt>SA_ONESHOT</tt> is provided as a historical synonym for <tt>SA_RESETHAND</tt>, but the latter name is preferable because it is standardized in SUSv3.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SA_RESTART</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Automatically restart system calls interrupted by this signal handler. See Section 21.5.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SA_SIGINFO</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Invoke
 the signal handler with additional arguments providing further 
information about the signal. We describe this flag in Section 21.4.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">All of the above options are specified in SUSv3.</p><p class="docText">An example of the use of <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span> is shown in Example 21-1.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
