<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>20.15. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">20.15. Summary</h3><p class="docText">A
 signal is a notification that some kind of event has occurred, and may 
be sent to a process by the kernel, by another process, or by itself. 
There is a range of standard signal types, each of which has a unique 
number and purpose.</p><p class="docText">Signal
 delivery is typically asynchronous, meaning that the point at which the
 signal interrupts execution of the process is unpredictable. In some 
cases (e.g., hardware-generated signals), signals are delivered 
synchronously, meaning that delivery occurs predictably and reproducibly
 at a certain point in the execution of a program.</p><p class="docText">By
 default, a signal either is ignored, terminates a process (with or 
without a core dump), stops a running process, or restarts a stopped 
process. The particular default action depends on the signal type. 
Alternatively, a program can use <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span>
 to explicitly ignore a signal or to establish a programmer-defined 
signal handler function that is invoked when the signal is delivered. 
For portability reasons, establishing a signal handler is best performed
 using <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span>.</p><p class="docText">A process (with suitable permissions) can send a signal to another process using <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span>. Sending the null signal (0) is a way of determining if a particular process ID is in use.</p><p class="docText">Each
 process has a signal mask, which is the set of signals whose delivery 
is currently blocked. Signals can be added to and removed from the 
signal mask using <span class="docEmphasis">sigprocmask()</span>.</p><p class="docText">If
 a signal is received while it is blocked, then it remains pending until
 it is unblocked. Standard signals can’t be queued; that is, a signal 
can be marked as pending (and thus later delivered) only once. A process
 can use the <span class="docEmphasis">sigpending()</span>
 system call to retrieve a signal set (a data structure used to 
represent multiple different signals) identifying the signals that it 
has pending.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span> system call provides more control and flexibility than <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span>
 when setting the disposition of a signal. First, we can specify a set 
of additional signals to be blocked when a handler is invoked. In 
addition, various flags can be used to control the actions that occur 
when a signal handler is invoked. For example, there are flags that 
select the older unreliable signal semantics (not blocking the signal 
causing invocation of a handler, and having the disposition of the 
signal reset to its default before the handler is called).</p><p class="docText">Using <span class="docEmphasis">pause()</span>, a process can suspend execution until a signal arrives.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EBSAK">20.15.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EFSAK">20.15.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">[Bovet
 &amp; Cesati, 2005] and [Maxwell, 1999] provide background on the 
implementation of signals in Linux. [Goodheart &amp; Cox, 1994] details 
the implementation of signals on System V Release 4. The GNU C library 
manual (available online at http://www.gnu.org/) contains an extensive description of signals.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
