<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>21.1. Designing Signal Handlers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">21.1. Designing Signal Handlers</h3><p class="docText">In
 general, it is preferable to write simple signal handlers. One 
important reason for this is to reduce the risk of creating race 
conditions. Two common designs for signal handlers are the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The
 signal handler sets a global flag and exits. The main program 
periodically checks this flag and, if it is set, takes appropriate 
action. (If the main program cannot perform such periodic checks because
 it needs to monitor one or more file descriptors to see if I/O is 
possible, then the signal handler can also write a single byte to a 
dedicated pipe whose read end is included among the file descriptors 
monitored by the main program. We show an example of this technique in Section 63.5.2.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">The signal handler performs some type of cleanup and then either terminates the process or uses a nonlocal goto (Section 21.2.1) to unwind the stack and return control to a predetermined location in the main program.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">In
 the following sections, we explore these ideas, as well as other 
concepts that are important in the design of signal handlers.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGUAK">21.1.1. Signals Are Not Queued (Revisited)</h4><p class="docText">In Section 20.10, we noted that delivery of a signal is blocked during the execution of its handler (unless we specify the <tt>SA_NODEFER</tt> flag to <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span>).
 If the signal is (again) generated while the handler is executing, then
 it is marked as pending and later delivered when the handler returns. 
We also already noted that signals are not queued. If the signal is 
generated more than once while the handler is executing, then it is 
still marked as pending, and it will later be delivered only once.</p><p class="docText">That
 signals can “disappear” in this way has implications for how we design 
signal handlers. To begin with, we can’t reliably count the number of 
times a signal is generated. Furthermore, we may need to code our signal
 handlers to deal with the possibility that multiple events of the type 
corresponding to the signal have occurred. We’ll see an example of this 
when we consider the use of the <tt>SIGCHLD</tt> signal in Section 26.3.1.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EFVAK">21.1.2. Reentrant and Async-Signal-Safe Functions</h4><p class="docText">Not
 all system calls and library functions can be safely called from a 
signal handler. To understand why requires an explanation of two 
concepts: reentrant functions and async-signal-safe functions.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EKVAK">21.1.2.1. Reentrant and nonreentrant functions</h5><p class="docText">To
 explain what a reentrant function is, we need to first distinguish 
between single-threaded and multithreaded programs. Classical UNIX 
programs have a single <span class="docEmphasis">thread of execution</span>:
 the CPU processes instructions for a single logical flow of execution 
through the program. In a multithreaded program, there are multiple, 
independent, concurrent logical flows of execution within the same 
process.</p><p class="docText">In Chapter 29,
 we’ll see how to explicitly create programs that contain multiple 
threads of execution. However, the concept of multiple threads of 
execution is also relevant for programs that employ signal handlers. 
Because a signal handler may asynchronously interrupt the execution of a
 program at any point in time, the main program and the signal handler 
in effect form two independent (although not concurrent) threads of 
execution within the same process.</p><p class="docText">A function is said to be <span class="docEmphasis">reentrant</span>
 if it can safely be simultaneously executed by multiple threads of 
execution in the same process. In this context, “safe” means that the 
function achieves its expected result, regardless of the state of 
execution of any other thread of execution.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The
 SUSv3 definition of a reentrant function is one “whose effect, when 
called by two or more threads, is guaranteed to be as if the threads 
each executed the function one after the other in an undefined order, 
even if the actual execution is interleaved.”</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">A function may be <span class="docEmphasis">nonreentrant</span>
 if it updates global or static data structures. (A function that 
employs only local variables is guaranteed to be reentrant.) If two 
invocations of (i.e., two threads executing) the function simultaneously
 attempt to update the same global variable or data structure, then 
these updates are likely to interfere with each other and produce 
incorrect results. For example, suppose that one thread of execution is 
in the middle of updating a linked list data structure to add a new list
 item when another thread also attempts to update the same linked list. 
Since adding a new item to the list requires updating multiple pointers,
 if another thread interrupts these steps and updates the same pointers,
 chaos will result.</p><p class="docText">Such possibilities are in fact rife within the standard C library. For example, we already noted in Section 7.1.3 that <span class="docEmphasis">malloc()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">free()</span> maintain a linked list of freed memory blocks available for reallocation from the heap. If a call to <span class="docEmphasis">malloc()</span> in the main program is interrupted by a signal handler that also calls <span class="docEmphasis">malloc()</span>, then this linked list can be corrupted. For this reason, the <span class="docEmphasis">malloc()</span> family of functions, and other library functions that use them, are nonreentrant.</p><p class="docText">Other
 library functions are nonreentrant because they return information 
using statically allocated memory. Examples of such functions (described
 elsewhere in this book) include <span class="docEmphasis">crypt()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">getpwnam()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyname()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">getservbyname()</span>.
 If a signal handler also uses one of these functions, then it will 
overwrite information returned by any earlier call to the same function 
from within the main program (or vice versa).</p><p class="docText">Functions
 can also be nonreentrant if they use static data structures for their 
internal bookkeeping. The most obvious examples of such functions are 
the members of the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> library (<span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">scanf()</span>, and so on), which update internal data structures for buffered I/O. Thus, when using <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span>
 from within a signal handler, we may sometimes see strange output—or 
even a program crash or data corruption—if the handler interrupts the 
main program in the middle of executing a call to <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> or another <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> function.</p><p class="docText">Even
 if we are not using nonreentrant library functions, reentrancy issues 
can still be relevant. If a signal handler updates programmer-defined 
global data structures that are also updated within the main program, 
then we can say that the signal handler is nonreentrant with respect to 
the main program.</p><p class="docText">If a 
function is nonreentrant, then its manual page will normally provide an 
explicit or implicit indication of this fact. In particular, watch out 
for statements that the function uses or returns information in 
statically allocated variables.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ECYAK">21.1.2.2. Example program</h5><p class="docText">Example 21-1 demonstrates the nonreentrant nature of the <span class="docEmphasis">crypt()</span> function (Section 8.5). As command-line arguments, this program accepts two strings. The program performs the following steps:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Call <span class="docEmphasis">crypt()</span> to encrypt the string in the first command-line argument, and copy this string to a separate buffer using <span class="docEmphasis">strdup()</span>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Establish a handler for <tt>SIGINT</tt> (generated by typing <span class="docEmphasis">Control-C</span>). The handler calls <span class="docEmphasis">crypt()</span> to encrypt the string supplied in the second command-line argument.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Enter an infinite <tt>for</tt> loop that uses <span class="docEmphasis">crypt()</span>
 to encrypt the string in the first command-line argument and check that
 the returned string is the same as that saved in step 1.</p></div></li></ol></div><p class="docText">In the absence of a signal, the strings will always match in step 3. However, if a <tt>SIGINT</tt> signal arrives and the execution of the signal handler interrupts the main program just after the execution of the <span class="docEmphasis">crypt()</span> call in the <tt>for</tt>
 loop, but before the check to see if the strings match, then the main 
program will report a mismatch. When we run the program, this is what we
 see:</p><pre>$ <b>./non_reentrant abc def </b>
<i> Repeatedly type Control-C to generate</i> SIGINT
Mismatch on call 109871 (mismatch=1 handled=1)
Mismatch on call 128061 (mismatch=2 handled=2)
<i> Many lines of output removed</i>
Mismatch on call 727935 (mismatch=149 handled=156)
Mismatch on call 729547 (mismatch=150 handled=157)
<i> Type Control-\ to generate</i> SIGQUIT
Quit (core dumped)</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Comparing the <span class="docEmphasis">mismatch</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">handled</span>
 values in the above output, we see that in the majority of cases where 
the signal handler is invoked, it overwrites the statically allocated 
buffer between the call to <span class="docEmphasis">crypt()</span> and the string comparison in <span class="docEmphasis">main()</span>.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EW1AK">Example 21-1. Calling a nonreentrant function from both <span class="docEmphasis">main()</span> and a signal handler</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>signals/nonreentrant.c</b>
#define _XOPEN_SOURCE 600
#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;
#include &lt;signal.h&gt;
#include &lt;string.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

static char *str2;              /* Set from argv[2] */
static int handled = 0;         /* Counts number of calls to handler */

static void
handler(int sig)
{

    crypt(str2, "xx");
    handled++;
}
int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    char *cr1;
    int callNum, mismatch;
    struct sigaction sa;

    if (argc != 3)
        usageErr("%s str1 str2\n", argv[0]);

    str2 = argv[2];                      /* Make argv[2] available to handler */
    cr1 = strdup(crypt(argv[1], "xx"));  /* Copy statically allocated string
                                            to another buffer */
    if (cr1 == NULL)
        errExit("strdup");

    sigemptyset(&amp;sa.sa_mask);
    sa.sa_flags = 0;
    sa.sa_handler = handler;
    if (sigaction(SIGINT, &amp;sa, NULL) == -1)
        errExit("sigaction");

    /* Repeatedly call crypt() using argv[1]. If interrupted by a
       signal handler, then the static storage returned by crypt()
       will be overwritten by the results of encrypting argv[2], and
       strcmp() will detect a mismatch with the value in 'cr1'. */

    for (callNum = 1, mismatch = 0; ; callNum++) {
        if (strcmp(crypt(argv[1], "xx"), cr1) != 0) {
            mismatch++;
            printf("Mismatch on call %d (mismatch=%d handled=%d)\n",
                    callNum, mismatch, handled);
        }
    }
}
     <b>signals/nonreentrant.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EE2AK">21.1.2.3. Standard async-signal-safe functions</h5><p class="docText">An <span class="docEmphasis">async-signal-safe</span>
 function is one that the implementation guarantees to be safe when 
called from a signal handler. A function is async-signal-safe either 
because it is reentrant or because it is not interruptible by a signal 
handler.</p><p class="docText">Table 21-1
 lists the functions that various standards require to be 
async-signal-safe. In this table, the functions whose names are not 
followed by a <span class="docEmphasis">v2</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">v3</span> were specified as async-signal-safe in POSIX.1-1990. SUSv2 added the functions marked <span class="docEmphasis">v2</span> to the list, and those marked <span class="docEmphasis">v3</span>
 were added by SUSv3. Individual UNIX implementations may make other 
functions async-signal-safe, but all standards-conformant UNIX 
implementations must ensure that at least these functions are 
async-signal-safe (if they are provided by the implementation; not all 
of these functions are provided on Linux).</p><p class="docText">SUSv4 makes the following changes to Table 21-1:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The following functions are removed: <span class="docEmphasis">fpathconf()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">pathconf()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The following functions are added: <span class="docEmphasis">execl()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">execv()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">faccessat()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fchmodat()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fchownat()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fexecve()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fstatat()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">futimens()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">linkat()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">mkdirat()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">mkfifoat()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">mknod()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">mknodat()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">openat()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">readlinkat()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">renameat()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">symlinkat()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">unlinkat()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">utimensat()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">utimes()</span>.</p></li></ul><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 21-1. Functions required to be async-signal-safe by POSIX.1-1990, SUSv2, and SUSv3</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">_Exit()(v3)</span>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">abort() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">accept() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">access()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">aio_error() (v2)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">aio_return()(v2)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">aio_suspend() (v2)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">alarm()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">bind()(v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">cfgetispeed()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">cfgetospeed()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">cfsetispeed()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">cfsetospeed()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">chdir()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">chmod()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">chown()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">clock_gettime() (v2)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">close()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">connect() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">creat()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">dup()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">execle()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">fchmod() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">fchown() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">fdatasync() (v2)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">fpathconf() (v2)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">fstat()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">fsync() (v2)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">ftruncate() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getegid()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">geteuid()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getgid()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getgroups()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getpeername() (v3)</span></p>
<span class="docEmphasis">getpgrp()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">getpid()</span>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getppid()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getsockname() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getsockopt() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getuid()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">link()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">listen() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">lseek()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">lstat() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">mkdir()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">mkfifo()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">open()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">pathconf()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">pause()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">pipe()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">poll() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">posix_trace_event() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">pselect() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">raise() (v2)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">read()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">readlink() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">recv() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">recvfrom() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">recvmsg() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">rename()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">rmdir()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">select() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sem_post() (v2)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">send() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sendmsg() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sendto() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">setgid()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">setpgid()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">setsid()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">setsockopt() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">setuid()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">shutdown() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span></p>
<span class="docEmphasis">sigaddset()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">sigdelset()</span>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sigemptyset()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sigfillset()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sigismember()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">signal() (v2)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sigpause() (v2)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sigpending()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sigprocmask()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sigqueue() (v2)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sigset() (v2)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sigsuspend()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sleep()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">socket() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sockatmark() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">socketpair() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">stat()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">symlink() (v3)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">tcdrain()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">tcflow()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">tcflush()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">tcgetattr()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">tcgetpgrp()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">tcsendbreak()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">tcsetattr()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">tcsetpgrp()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">time()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">timer_getoverrun() (v2)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">timer_gettime() (v2)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">timer_settime() (v2)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">times()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">umask()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">uname()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">unlink()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">utime()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">waitpid()</span></p>
<span class="docEmphasis">write()</span></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">SUSv3 notes that all functions not listed in Table 21-1
 are considered to be unsafe with respect to signals, but points out 
that a function is unsafe only when invocation of a signal handler 
interrupts the execution of an unsafe function, and the handler itself 
also calls an unsafe function. In other words, when writing signal 
handlers, we have two choices:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Ensure that the code of the signal handler itself is reentrant and that it calls only async-signal-safe functions.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Block
 delivery of signals while executing code in the main program that calls
 unsafe functions or works with global data structures also updated by 
the signal handler.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The
 problem with the second approach is that, in a complex program, it can 
be difficult to ensure that a signal handler will never interrupt the 
main program while it is calling an unsafe function. For this reason, 
the above rules are often simplified to the statement that we must not 
call unsafe functions from within a signal handler.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">If we set up the same handler function to deal with several different signals or use the <tt>SA_NODEFER</tt> flag to <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span>,
 then a handler may interrupt itself. As a consequence, the handler may 
be nonreentrant if it updates global (or static) variables, even if they
 are not used by the main program.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EABCK">21.1.2.4. Use of <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> inside signal handlers</h5><p class="docText">Because they may update <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>, use of the functions listed in Table 21-1 can nevertheless render a signal handler nonreentrant, since they may overwrite the <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> value that was set by a function called from the main program. The workaround is to save the value of <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> on entry to a signal handler that uses any of the functions in Table 21-1 and restore the <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> value on exit from the handler, as in the following example:</p><pre>void
handler(int sig)
{
    int savedErrno;

    savedErrno = errno;

    /* Now we can execute a function that might modify errno */

    errno = savedErrno;
}</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EADCK">21.1.2.5. Use of unsafe functions in example programs in this book</h5><p class="docText">Although <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> is not async-signal-safe, we use it in signal handlers in various example programs in this book. We do so because <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span>
 provides an easy and concise way to demonstrate that a signal handler 
has been called, and to display the contents of relevant variables 
within the handler. For similar reasons, we occasionally use a few other
 unsafe functions in signal handlers, including other <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> functions and <span class="docEmphasis">strsignal()</span>.</p><p class="docText">Real-world
 applications should avoid calling non-async-signal-safe functions from 
signal handlers. To make this clear, each signal handler in the example 
programs that uses one of these functions is marked with a comment 
indicating that the usage is unsafe:</p><pre>printf("Some message\n");           /* UNSAFE */</pre><br/>
<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESDCK">21.1.3. Global Variables and the <span class="docEmphasis">sig_atomic_t</span> Data Type</h4><p class="docText">Notwithstanding
 reentrancy issues, it can be useful to share global variables between 
the main program and a signal handler. This can be safe as long as the 
main program correctly handles the possibility that the signal handler 
may change the global variable at any time. For example, one common 
design is to make a signal handler’s sole action the setting of a global
 flag. This flag is periodically checked by the main program, which then
 takes appropriate action in response to the delivery of the signal (and
 clears the flag). When global variables are accessed in this way from a
 signal handler, we should always declare them using the <tt>volatile</tt> attribute (see Section 6.8) in order to prevent the compiler from performing optimizations that result in the variable being stored in a register.</p><p class="docText">Reading
 and writing global variables may involve more than one machine-language
 instruction, and a signal handler may interrupt the main program in the
 middle of such an instruction sequence. (We say that access to the 
variable is <span class="docEmphasis">nonatomic</span>.) For this reason, the C language standards and SUSv3 specify an integer data type, <span class="docEmphasis">sig_atomic_t</span>,
 for which reads and writes are guaranteed to be atomic. Thus, a global 
flag variable that is shared between the main program and a signal 
handler should be declared as follows:</p><pre>volatile sig_atomic_t flag;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We show an example of the use of the <span class="docEmphasis">sig_atomic_t</span> data type in Example 22-5, in Section 22.9.1.1.</p><p class="docText">Note that the C increment (<tt>++</tt>) and decrement (<tt>--</tt>) operators don’t fall within the guarantee provided for <span class="docEmphasis">sig_atomic_t</span>. On some hardware architectures, these operations may not be atomic (refer to Section 30.1 for more details). All that we are guaranteed to be safely allowed to do with a <span class="docEmphasis">sig_atomic_t</span> variable is set it within the signal handler, and check it in the main program (or vice versa).</p><p class="docText">C99 and SUSv3 specify that an implementation should define two constants (in <tt>&lt;stdint.h&gt;</tt>), <tt>SIG_ATOMIC_MIN</tt> and <tt>SIG_ATOMIC_MAX</tt>, that define the range of values that may be assigned to variables of type <span class="docEmphasis">sig_atomic_t</span>. The standards require that this range be at least -127 to 127 if <span class="docEmphasis">sig_atomic_t</span>
 is represented as a signed value, or 0 to 255 if it is represented as 
an unsigned value. On Linux, these two constants equate to the negative 
and positive limits for signed 32-bit integers.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
