<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>21.2. Other Methods of Terminating a Signal Handler</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">21.2. Other Methods of Terminating a Signal Handler</h3><p class="docText">All
 of the signal handlers that we have looked at so far complete by 
returning to the main program. However, simply returning from a signal 
handler sometimes isn’t desirable, or in some cases, isn’t even useful. 
(We’ll see an example of where returning from a signal handler isn’t 
useful when we discuss hardware-generated signals in Section 22.4.)</p><p class="docText">There are various other ways of terminating a signal handler:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Use <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span> to terminate the process. Beforehand, the handler may carry out some cleanup actions. Note that we can’t use <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span> to terminate a signal handler, because it is not one of safe functions listed in Table 21-1. It is unsafe because it flushes <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffers prior to calling <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span>, as described in Section 25.1.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Use <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">raise()</span> to send a signal that kills the process (i.e., a signal whose default action is process termination).</p></li><li><p class="docList">Perform a nonlocal goto from the signal handler.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Use the <span class="docEmphasis">abort()</span> function to terminate the process with a core dump.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The last two of these options are described in further detail in the following sections.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDXAK">21.2.1. Performing a Nonlocal Goto from a Signal Handler</h4><p class="docText">Section 6.8 described the use of <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span>
 to perform a nonlocal goto from a function to one of its callers. We 
can also use this technique from a signal handler. This provides a way 
to recover after delivery of a signal caused by a hardware exception 
(e.g., a memory access error), and also allows us to catch a signal and 
return control to a particular point in a program. For example, upon 
receipt of a <tt>SIGINT</tt> signal (normally generated by typing <span class="docEmphasis">Control-C</span>), the shell performs a nonlocal goto to return control to its main input loop (and thus read a new command).</p><p class="docText">However, there is a problem with using the standard <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span>
 function to exit from a signal handler. We noted earlier that, upon 
entry to the signal handler, the kernel automatically adds the invoking 
signal, as well as any signals specified in the <span class="docEmphasis">act.sa_mask</span> field, to the process signal mask, and then removes these signals from the mask when the handler does a normal return.</p><p class="docText">What happens to the signal mask if we exit the signal handler using <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span>? The answer depends on the genealogy of the particular UNIX implementation. Under System V, <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span>
 doesn’t restore the signal mask, so that blocked signals are not 
unblocked upon leaving the handler. Linux follows the System V behavior.
 (This is usually not what we want, since it leaves the signal that 
caused invocation of the handler blocked.) Under BSD-derived 
implementations, <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> saves the signal mask in its <span class="docEmphasis">env</span> argument, and the saved signal mask is restored by <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span>. (BSD-derived implementations also provide two other functions, <span class="docEmphasis">_setjmp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">_longjmp()</span>, which have the System V semantics.) In other words, we can’t portably use <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> to exit a signal handler.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">If we define the <tt>_BSD_SOURCE</tt> feature test macro when compiling a program, then (the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>) <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> follows the BSD semantics.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Because of this difference in the two main UNIX variants, POSIX.1-1990 chose not to specify the handling of the signal mask by <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span>. Instead, it defined a pair of new functions, <span class="docEmphasis">sigsetjmp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">siglongjmp()</span>, that provide explicit control of the signal mask when performing a nonlocal goto.</p><pre>#include &lt;setjmp.h&gt;

int <b>sigsetjmp</b>(sigjmp_buf <span class="docEmphasis">env</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">savesigs</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on initial call, nonzero on return via <span class="docEmphasis">siglongjmp()</span></p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><pre>void <b>siglongjmp</b>(sigjmp_buf <span class="docEmphasis">env</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">val</span>);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sigsetjmp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">siglongjmp()</span> functions operate similarly to <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span>. The only differences are in the type of the <span class="docEmphasis">env</span> argument (<span class="docEmphasis">sigjmp_buf</span> instead of <span class="docEmphasis">jmp_buf</span>) and the extra <span class="docEmphasis">savesigs</span> argument to <span class="docEmphasis">sigsetjmp()</span>. If <span class="docEmphasis">savesigs</span> is nonzero, then the process signal mask that is current at the time of the <span class="docEmphasis">sigsetjmp()</span> call is saved in <span class="docEmphasis">env</span> and restored by a later <span class="docEmphasis">siglongjmp()</span> call specifying the same <span class="docEmphasis">env</span> argument. If <span class="docEmphasis">savesigs</span> is 0, then the process signal mask is not saved and restored.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">siglongjmp()</span> functions are not listed among the async-signal-safe functions in Table 21-1.
 This is because calling any non-async-signal-safe function after 
performing a nonlocal goto carries the same risks as calling that 
function from within the signal handler. Furthermore, if a signal 
handler interrupts the main program while it is part-way through 
updating a data structure, and the handler exits by performing a 
nonlocal goto, then the incomplete update may leave that data structure 
in an inconsistent state. One technique that can help to avoid problems 
is to use <span class="docEmphasis">sigprocmask()</span> to temporarily block the signal while sensitive updates are being performed.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ET3AK">21.2.1.1. Example program</h5><p class="docText">Example 21-2
 demonstrates the difference in signal mask handling for the two types 
of nonlocal gotos. This program establishes a handler for <tt>SIGINT</tt>. The program is designed to allow either <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> plus <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">sigsetjmp()</span> plus <span class="docEmphasis">siglongjmp()</span> to be used to exit the signal handler, depending on whether the program is compiled with the <tt>USE_SIGSETJMP</tt>
 macro defined. The program displays the current settings of the signal 
mask both on entry to the signal handler and after the nonlocal goto has
 transferred control from the handler back to the main program.</p><p class="docText">When we build the program so that <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> is used to exit the signal handler, this is what we see when we run the program:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>make -s sigmask_longjmp </b>         <i> Default compilation causes</i>
 <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> <i> to be used</i>
$ <b>./sigmask_longjmp </b>
Signal mask at startup:
                &lt;empty signal set&gt;
Calling setjmp()
<i> Type Control-C to generate</i> SIGINT
Received signal 2 (Interrupt), signal mask is:
                2 (Interrupt)
After jump from handler, signal mask is:
                2 (Interrupt)
<i> (At this point, typing Control-C again has no effect, since</i> SIGINT <i> is blocked)</i>
<i> Type Control-\ to kill the program</i>
Quit

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">From the program output, we can see that, after a <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> from the signal handler, the signal mask remains set to the value to which it was set on entry to the signal handler.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In
 the above shell session, we built the program using the makefile 
supplied with the source code distribution for this book. The <span class="docEmphasis">-s</span> option tells <span class="docEmphasis">make</span>
 not to echo the commands that it is executing. We use this option to 
avoid cluttering the session log. ([Mecklenburg, 2005] provides a 
description of the GNU <span class="docEmphasis">make</span> program.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">When we compile the same source file to build an executable that uses <span class="docEmphasis">siglongjmp()</span> to exit the handler, we see the following:</p><pre>$ <b>make -s sigmask_siglongjmp </b>      <i> Compiles using</i> <span class="docEmphasis">cc -DUSE_SIGSETJMP</span>
$ <b>./sigmask_siglongjmp </b>
Signal mask at startup:
                &lt;empty signal set&gt;
Calling sigsetjmp()
<i> Type Control-C</i>
Received signal 2 (Interrupt), signal mask is:
                2 (Interrupt)
After jump from handler, signal mask is:
                &lt;empty signal set&gt;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">At this point, <tt>SIGINT</tt> is not blocked, because <span class="docEmphasis">siglongjmp()</span> restored the signal mask to its original state. Next, we type <span class="docEmphasis">Control-C</span> again, so that the handler is once more invoked:</p><pre><i>Type Control-C</i>
Received signal 2 (Interrupt), signal mask is:
                2 (Interrupt)
After jump from handler, signal mask is:
                &lt;empty signal set&gt;
<i>Type Control-\ to kill the program</i>
Quit</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">From the above output, we can see that <span class="docEmphasis">siglongjmp()</span> restores the signal mask to the value it had at the time of the <span class="docEmphasis">sigsetjmp()</span> call (i.e., an empty signal set).</p><p class="docText">Example 21-2
 also demonstrates a useful technique for use with a signal handler that
 performs a nonlocal goto. Because a signal can be generated at any 
time, it may actually occur before the target of the goto has been set 
up by <span class="docEmphasis">sigsetjmp()</span> (or <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span>). To prevent this possibility (which would cause the handler to perform a nonlocal goto using an uninitialized <span class="docEmphasis">env</span> buffer), we employ a guard variable, <span class="docEmphasis">canJump</span>, to indicate whether the <span class="docEmphasis">env</span> buffer has been initialized. If <span class="docEmphasis">canJump</span>
 is false, then instead of doing a nonlocal goto, the handler simply 
returns. An alternative approach is to arrange the program code so that 
the call to <span class="docEmphasis">sigsetjmp()</span> (or <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span>)
 occurs before the signal handler is established. However, in complex 
programs, it may be difficult to ensure that these two steps are 
performed in that order, and the use of a guard variable may be simpler.</p><p class="docText">Note that using <tt>#ifdef</tt> was the simplest way of writing the program in Example 21-2 in a standards-conformant fashion. In particular, we could not have replaced the <tt>#ifdef</tt> with the following run-time check:</p><pre>if (useSiglongjmp)
    s = sigsetjmp(senv, 1);
else
    s = setjmp(env);
if (s == 0)
    ...</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This is not permitted because SUSv3 doesn’t allow <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sigsetjmp()</span> to be used within an assignment statement (see Section 6.8).</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E3CBK">Example 21-2. Performing a nonlocal goto from a signal handler</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>signals/sigmask_longjmp.c</b>
#define _GNU_SOURCE     /* Get strsignal() declaration from &lt;string.h&gt; */
#include &lt;string.h&gt;
#include &lt;setjmp.h&gt;
#include &lt;signal.h&gt;
#include "signal_functions.h"           /* Declaration of printSigMask() */
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

static volatile sig_atomic_t canJump = 0;
                        /* Set to 1 once "env" buffer has been
                           initialized by [sig]setjmp() */
#ifdef USE_SIGSETJMP
static sigjmp_buf senv;
#else
static jmp_buf env;
#endif

static void
handler(int sig)
{
    /* UNSAFE: This handler uses non-async-signal-safe functions
       (printf(), strsignal(), printSigMask(); see Section 21.1.2) */

    printf("Received signal %d (%s), signal mask is:\n", sig,
            strsignal(sig));
    printSigMask(stdout, NULL);

    if (!canJump) {
        printf("'env' buffer not yet set, doing a simple return\n");
        return;
    }

#ifdef USE_SIGSETJMP
    siglongjmp(senv, 1);
#else
    longjmp(env, 1);
#endif
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    struct sigaction sa;

    printSigMask(stdout, "Signal mask at startup:\n");

    sigemptyset(&amp;sa.sa_mask);
    sa.sa_flags = 0;
    sa.sa_handler = handler;
    if (sigaction(SIGINT, &amp;sa, NULL) == -1)
        errExit("sigaction");

#ifdef USE_SIGSETJMP
    printf("Calling sigsetjmp()\n");
    if (sigsetjmp(senv, 1) == 0)
#else
    printf("Calling setjmp()\n");
    if (setjmp(env) == 0)
#endif
        canJump = 1;                    /* Executed after [sig]setjmp() */

    else                                /* Executed after [sig]longjmp() */
        printSigMask(stdout, "After jump from handler, signal mask is:\n" );

    for (;;)                            /* Wait for signals until killed */
        pause();
}
      <b>signals/sigmask_longjmp.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EHDBK">21.2.2. Terminating a Process Abnormally: <span class="docEmphasis">abort()</span></h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">abort()</span> function terminates the calling process and causes it to produce a core dump.</p><pre>#include &lt;stdlib.h&gt;

void <b>abort</b>(void);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">abort()</span> function terminates the calling process by raising a <tt>SIGABRT</tt> signal. The default action for <tt>SIGABRT</tt>
 is to produce a core dump file and terminate the process. The core dump
 file can then be used within a debugger to examine the state of the 
program at the time of the <span class="docEmphasis">abort()</span> call.</p><p class="docText">SUSv3 requires that <span class="docEmphasis">abort()</span> override the effect of blocking or ignoring <tt>SIGABRT</tt>. Furthermore, SUSv3 specifies that <span class="docEmphasis">abort()</span>
 must terminate the process unless the process catches the signal with a
 handler that doesn’t return. This last statement requires a moment’s 
thought. Of the methods of terminating a signal handler described in Section 21.2, the one that is relevant here is the use of a nonlocal goto to exit the handler. If this is done, then the effect of <span class="docEmphasis">abort()</span> will be nullified; otherwise, <span class="docEmphasis">abort()</span>
 always terminates the process. In most implementations, termination is 
guaranteed as follows: if the process still hasn’t terminated after 
raising <tt>SIGABRT</tt> once (i.e., a handler catches the signal and returns, so that execution of <span class="docEmphasis">abort()</span> is resumed), <span class="docEmphasis">abort()</span> resets the handling of <tt>SIGABRT</tt> to <tt>SIG_DFL</tt> and raises a second <tt>SIGABRT</tt>, which is guaranteed to kill the process.</p><p class="docText">If <span class="docEmphasis">abort()</span> does successfully terminate the process, then it also flushes and closes <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> streams.</p><p class="docText">An example of the use of <span class="docEmphasis">abort()</span> is provided in the error-handling functions of Example 3-3, in Section 3.5.2.3.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
