<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>21.3. Handling a Signal on an Alternate Stack: sigaltstack()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">21.3. Handling a Signal on an Alternate Stack: <span class="docEmphasis">sigaltstack()</span></h3><p class="docText">Normally,
 when a signal handler is invoked, the kernel creates a frame for it on 
the process stack. However, this may not be possible if a process 
attempts to extend the stack beyond the maximum possible size. For 
example, this may occur because the stack grows so large that it 
encounters a region of mapped memory (Section 48.5) or the upwardly growing heap, or it reaches the <tt>RLIMIT_STACK</tt> resource limit (Section 36.3).</p><p class="docText">When a process attempts to grow its stack beyond the maximum possible size, the kernel generates a <tt>SIGSEGV</tt> signal for the process. However, since the stack space is exhausted, the kernel can’t create a frame for any <tt>SIGSEGV</tt>
 handler that the program may have established. Consequently, the 
handler is not invoked, and the process is terminated (the default 
action for <tt>SIGSEGV</tt>).</p><p class="docText">If we instead need to ensure that the <tt>SIGSEGV</tt> signal is handled in these circumstances, we can do the following:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Allocate an area of memory, called an <span class="docEmphasis">alternate signal stack</span>, to be used for the stack frame of a signal handler.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Use the <span class="docEmphasis">sigaltstack()</span> system call to inform the kernel of the existence of the alternate signal stack.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">When establishing the signal handler, specify the <tt>SA_ONSTACK</tt> flag, to tell the kernel that the frame for this handler should be created on the alternate stack.</p></div></li></ol></div><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sigaltstack()</span>
 system call both establishes an alternate signal stack and returns 
information about any alternate signal stack that is already 
established.</p><pre>#include &lt;signal.h&gt;

int <b>sigaltstack</b>(const stack_t *<span class="docEmphasis">sigstack</span>, stack_t *<span class="docEmphasis">old_sigstack</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sigstack</span> argument points to a structure specifying the location and attributes of the new alternate signal stack. The <span class="docEmphasis">old_sigstack</span>
 argument points to a structure used to return information about the 
previously established alternate signal stack (if there was one). Either
 one of these arguments can be specified as <tt>NULL</tt>. For example, we can find out about the existing alternate signal stack, without changing it, by specifying <tt>NULL</tt> for the <span class="docEmphasis">sigstack</span> argument. Otherwise, each of these arguments points to a structure of the following type:</p><pre>typedef struct {
    void  *ss_sp;         /* Starting address of alternate stack */
    int    ss_flags;      /* Flags: SS_ONSTACK, SS_DISABLE */
    size_t ss_size;       /* Size of alternate stack */
} stack_t;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">ss_sp</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ss_size</span>
 fields specify the size and location of the alternate signal stack. 
When actually using the alternate signal stack, the kernel automatically
 takes care of aligning the value given in <span class="docEmphasis">ss_sp</span> to an address boundary that is suitable for the hardware architecture.</p><p class="docText">Typically,
 the alternate signal stack is either statically allocated or 
dynamically allocated on the heap. SUSv3 specifies the constant <tt>SIGSTKSZ</tt> to be used as a typical value when sizing the alternate stack, and <tt>MINSIGSTKSZ</tt>
 as the minimum size required to invoke a signal handler. On 
Linux/x86-32, these constants are defined with the values 8192 and 2048,
 respectively.</p><p class="docText">The kernel 
doesn’t resize an alternate signal stack. If the stack overflows the 
space we have allocated for it, then chaos results (e.g., overwriting of
 variables beyond the limits of the stack). This is not usually a 
problem—because we normally use an alternate signal stack to handle the 
special case of the standard stack overflowing, typically only one or a 
few frames are allocated on the stack. The job of the <tt>SIGSEGV</tt> handler is either to perform some cleanup and terminate the process or to unwind the standard stack using a nonlocal goto.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">ss_flags</span> field contains one of the following values:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SS_ONSTACK</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">If this flag is set when retrieving information about the currently established alternate signal stack (<span class="docEmphasis">old_sigstack</span>),
 it indicates that the process is currently executing on the alternate 
signal stack. Attempts to establish a new alternate signal stack while 
the process is already running on an alternate signal stack result in an
 error (<tt>EPERM</tt>) from <span class="docEmphasis">sigaltstack()</span>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SS_DISABLE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Returned in <span class="docEmphasis">old_sigstack</span>, this flag indicates that there is no currently established alternate signal stack. When specified in <span class="docEmphasis">sigstack</span>, this disables a currently established alternate signal stack.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">Example 21-3
 demonstrates the establishment and use of an alternate signal stack. 
After establishing an alternate signal stack and a handler for <tt>SIGSEGV</tt>, this program calls a function that infinitely recurses, so that the stack overflows and the process is sent a <tt>SIGSEGV</tt> signal. When we run the program, this is what we see:</p><pre>$ <b>ulimit -s unlimited </b>
$ <b>./t_sigaltstack </b>
Top of standard stack is near 0xbffff6b8
Alternate stack is at          0x804a948-0x804cfff
Call    1 - top of stack near 0xbff0b3ac
Call    2 - top of stack near 0xbfe1714c
<i> Many intervening lines of output removed</i>
Call 2144 - top of stack near 0x4034120c
Call 2145 - top of stack near 0x4024cfac
Caught signal 11 (Segmentation fault)
Top of handler stack near      0x804c860</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In this shell session, the <span class="docEmphasis">ulimit</span> command is used to remove any <tt>RLIMIT_STACK</tt> resource limit that may have been set in the shell. We explain this resource limit in Section 36.3.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EMBBK">Example 21-3. Using <span class="docEmphasis">sigaltstack()</span></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>signals/t_sigaltstack.c</b>
#define _GNU_SOURCE          /* Get strsignal() declaration from &lt;string.h&gt; */
#include &lt;string.h&gt;
#include &lt;signal.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

static void
sigsegvHandler(int sig)
{
    int x;

    /* UNSAFE: This handler uses non-async-signal-safe functions
       (printf(), strsignal(), fflush(); see Section 21.1.2) */

    printf("Caught signal %d (%s)\n", sig, strsignal(sig));
    printf("Top of handler stack near     %10p\n", (void *) &amp;x);
    fflush(NULL);

    _exit(EXIT_FAILURE);                /* Can't return after SIGSEGV */
}

static void             /* A recursive function that overflows the stack */
overflowStack(int callNum)
{
    char a[100000];                     /* Make this stack frame large */

    printf("Call %4d - top of stack near %10p\n", callNum, &amp;a[0]);
    overflowStack(callNum+1);
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    stack_t sigstack;
    struct sigaction sa;
    int j;

    printf("Top of standard stack is near %10p\n", (void *) &amp;j);

    /* Allocate alternate stack and inform kernel of its existence */

    sigstack.ss_sp = malloc(SIGSTKSZ);
    if (sigstack.ss_sp == NULL)
        errExit("malloc");

    sigstack.ss_size = SIGSTKSZ;
    sigstack.ss_flags = 0;
    if (sigaltstack(&amp;sigstack, NULL) == -1)
        errExit("sigaltstack");
    printf("Alternate stack is at         %10p-%p\n",
            sigstack.ss_sp, (char *) sbrk(0) - 1);

    sa.sa_handler = sigsegvHandler;     /* Establish handler for SIGSEGV */
    sigemptyset(&amp;sa.sa_mask);
    sa.sa_flags = SA_ONSTACK;           /* Handler uses alternate stack */
    if (sigaction(SIGSEGV, &amp;sa, NULL) == -1)
        errExit("sigaction");

    overflowStack(1);
}
      <b>signals/t_sigaltstack.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
