<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>21.4. The SA_SIGINFO Flag</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">21.4. The <tt>SA_SIGINFO</tt> Flag</h3><p class="docText">Setting the <tt>SA_SIGINFO</tt> flag when establishing a handler with <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span>
 allows the handler to obtain additional information about a signal when
 it is delivered. In order to obtain this information, we must declare 
the handler as follows:</p><pre>void handler(int sig, siginfo_t *siginfo, void *ucontext);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The first argument, <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span>, is the signal number, as for a standard signal handler. The second argument, <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo</span>,
 is a structure used to provide the additional information about the 
signal. We describe this structure below. The last argument, <span class="docEmphasis">ucontext</span>, is also described below.</p><p class="docText">Since
 the above signal handler has a different prototype from a standard 
signal handler, C typing rules mean that we can’t use the <span class="docEmphasis">sa_handler</span> field of the <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction</span> structure to specify the address of the handler. Instead, we must use an alternative field: <span class="docEmphasis">sa_sigaction</span>. In other words, the definition of the <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction</span> structure is somewhat more complex than was shown in Section 20.13. In full, the structure is defined as follows:</p><pre>struct sigaction {
    union {
        void (*sa_handler)(int);
        void (*sa_sigaction)(int, siginfo_t *, void *);
    } __sigaction_handler;
    sigset_t   sa_mask;
    int        sa_flags;
    void     (*sa_restorer)(void);
};
/* Following defines make the union fields look like simple fields
   in the parent structure */
#define sa_handler __sigaction_handler.sa_handler
#define sa_sigaction __sigaction_handler.sa_sigaction</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction</span> structure uses a union to combine the <span class="docEmphasis">sa_sigaction</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sa_handler</span>
 fields. (Most other UNIX implementations similarly use a union for this
 purpose.) Using a union is possible because only one of these fields is
 required during a particular call to <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span>. (However, this can lead to strange bugs if we naively expect to be able to set the <span class="docEmphasis">sa_handler</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sa_sigaction</span> fields independently of one another, perhaps because we reuse a single <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction</span> structure in multiple <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span> calls to establish handlers for different signals.)</p><p class="docText">Here is an example of the use of <tt>SA_SIGINFO</tt> to establish a signal handler:</p><pre>struct sigaction act;

sigemptyset(&amp;act.sa_mask);
act.sa_sigaction = handler;
act.sa_flags = SA_SIGINFO;

if (sigaction(SIGINT, &amp;act, NULL) == -1)
    errExit("sigaction");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">For complete examples of the use of the <tt>SA_SIGINFO</tt> flag, see Example 22-3 (page 462) and Example 23-5 (page 500).</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EA6AK">21.4.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EE6AK">21.4.1.1. The <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span> structure</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span> structure passed as the second argument to a signal handler that is established with <tt>SA_SIGINFO</tt> has the following form:</p><pre>typedef struct {
    int     si_signo;         /* Signal number */
    int     si_code;          /* Signal code */
    int     si_trapno;        /* Trap number for hardware-generated signal
                                 (unused on most architectures) */
    union sigval si_value;    /* Accompanying data from sigqueue() */
    pid_t   si_pid;           /* Process ID of sending process */
    uid_t   si_uid;           /* Real user ID of sender */
    int     si_errno;         /* Error number (generally unused) */
    void   *si_addr;          /* Address that generated signal

                                 (hardware-generated signals only) */

    int     si_overrun;       /* Overrun count (Linux 2.6, POSIX timers) */
    int     si_timerid;       /* (Kernel-internal) Timer ID
                                 (Linux 2.6, POSIX timers) */
    long    si_band;          /* Band event (SIGPOLL/SIGIO) */
    int     si_fd;            /* File descriptor (SIGPOLL/SIGIO) */
    int     si_status;        /* Exit status or signal (SIGCHLD) */
    clock_t si_utime;         /* User CPU time (SIGCHLD) */
    clock_t si_stime;         /* System CPU time (SIGCHLD) */
} siginfo_t;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>_POSIX_C_SOURCE</tt> feature test macro must be defined with a value greater than or equal to 199309 in order to make the declaration of the <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span> structure visible from <tt>&lt;signal.h&gt;</tt>.</p><p class="docText">On Linux, as on most UNIX implementations, many of the fields in the <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span> structure are combined into a union, since not all of the fields are needed for each signal. (See <tt>&lt;bits/siginfo.h&gt;</tt> for details.)</p><p class="docText">Upon entry to a signal handler, the fields of the <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span> structure are set as follows:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">si_signo</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This
 field is set for all signals. It contains the number of the signal 
causing invocation of the handler—that is, the same value as the <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span> argument to the handler.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">si_code</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This field is set for all signals. It contains a code providing further information about the origin of the signal, as shown in Table 21-2.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">si_value</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This field contains the accompanying data for a signal sent via <span class="docEmphasis">sigqueue()</span>. We describe <span class="docEmphasis">sigqueue()</span> in Section 22.8.1.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">si_pid</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">For signals sent via <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">sigqueue()</span>, this field is set to the process ID of the sending process.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">si_uid</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">For signals sent via <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">sigqueue()</span>,
 this field is set to the real user ID of the sending process. The 
system provides the real user ID of the sending process because that is 
more informative than providing the effective user ID. Consider the 
permission rules for sending signals described in Section 20.5:
 if the effective user ID grants the sender permission to send the 
signal, then that user ID must either be 0 (i.e., a privileged process),
 or be the same as the real user ID or saved set-user-ID of the 
receiving process. In this case, it could be useful for the receiver to 
know the sender’s real user ID, which may be different from the 
effective user ID (e.g., if the sender is a set-user-ID program).</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">si_errno</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">If this field is set to a nonzero value, then it contains an error number (like <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>) that identifies the cause of the signal. This field is generally unused on Linux.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">si_addr</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This field is set only for hardware-generated <tt>SIGBUS</tt>, <tt>SIGSEGV</tt>, <tt>SIGILL</tt>, and <tt>SIGFPE</tt> signals. For the <tt>SIGBUS</tt> and <tt>SIGSEGV</tt> signals, this field contains the address that caused the invalid memory reference. For the <tt>SIGILL</tt> and <tt>SIGFPE</tt> signals, this field contains the address of the program instruction that caused the signal.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">The
 following fields, which are nonstandard Linux extensions, are set only 
on the delivery of a signal generated on expiration of a POSIX timer 
(see Section 23.6):</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">si_timerid</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This field contains an ID that the kernel uses internally to identify the timer.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">si_overrun</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This field is set to the overrun count for the timer.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">The following two fields are set only for the delivery of a <tt>SIGIO</tt> signal (Section 63.3):</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">si_band</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This field contains the “band event” value associated with the I/O event. (In versions of <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> up until 2.3.2, <span class="docEmphasis">si_band</span> was typed as <span class="docEmphasis">int</span>.)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">si_fd</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This
 field contains the number of the file descriptor associated with the 
I/O event. This field is not specified in SUSv3, but it is present on 
many other implementations.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">The following fields are set only for the delivery of a <tt>SIGCHLD</tt> signal (Section 26.3):</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">si_status</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This field contains either the exit status of the child (if <span class="docEmphasis">si_code</span> is <tt>CLD_EXITED</tt>)
 or the number of the signal sent to the child (i.e., the number of the 
signal that terminated or stopped the child, as described in Section 26.1.3).</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">si_utime</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This
 field contains the user CPU time used by the child process. In kernels 
before 2.6, and since 2.6.27, this is measured in system clock ticks 
(divide by <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf(_SC_CLK_TCK)</span>). In 2.6 kernels before 2.6.27, a bug meant that this field reported times measured in (user-configurable) jiffies (see Section 10.6). This field is not specified in SUSv3, but it is present on many other implementations.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">si_stime</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This field contains the system CPU time used by the child process. See the description of the <span class="docEmphasis">si_utime</span> field. This field is not specified in SUSv3, but it is present on many other implementations.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">si_code</span> field provides further information about the origin of the signal, using the values shown in Table 21-2.
 Not all of the signal-specific values shown in the second column of 
this table occur on all UNIX implementations and hardware architectures 
(especially in the case of the four hardware-generated signals <tt>SIGBUS</tt>, <tt>SIGSEGV</tt>, <tt>SIGILL</tt>, and <tt>SIGFPE</tt>), although all of these constants are defined on Linux and most appear in SUSv3.</p><p class="docText">Note the following additional points about the values shown in Table 21-2:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The values <tt>SI_KERNEL</tt> and <tt>SI_SIGIO</tt> are Linux-specific. They are not specified in SUSv3 and do not appear on other UNIX implementations.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>SI_SIGIO</tt> is employed only in Linux 2.2. From kernel 2.4 onward, Linux instead employs the <tt>POLL_*</tt> constants shown in the table.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">SUSv4 specifies the <span class="docEmphasis">psiginfo()</span> function, whose purpose is similar to <span class="docEmphasis">psignal()</span> (Section 20.8). The <span class="docEmphasis">psiginfo()</span> function takes two arguments: a pointer to a <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span>
 structure and a message string. It prints the message string on 
standard error, followed by information about the signal described in 
the <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span> structure. The <span class="docEmphasis">psiginfo()</span> function is provided by <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> since version 2.10. The <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> implementation prints the signal description, the origin of the signal (as indicated by the <span class="docEmphasis">si_code</span> field), and, for some signals, other fields from the <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span> structure. The <span class="docEmphasis">psiginfo()</span> function is new in SUSv4, and it is not available on all systems.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 21-2. Values returned in the <span class="docEmphasis">si_code</span> field of the <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span> structure</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Signal</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom"><span class="docEmphasis">si_code</span> value</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Origin of signal</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Any</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SI_ASYNCIO</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Completion of an asynchronous I/O (AIO) operation</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SI_KERNEL</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Sent by the kernel (e.g., a signal from terminal driver)</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SI_MESGQ</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Message arrival on POSIX message queue (since Linux 2.6.6)</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SI_QUEUE</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A realtime signal from a user process via <span class="docEmphasis">sigqueue()</span></td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SI_SIGIO</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGIO</tt> signal (Linux 2.2 only)</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SI_TIMER</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Expiration of a POSIX (realtime) timer</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SI_TKILL</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A user process via <span class="docEmphasis">tkill()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">tgkill()</span> (since Linux 2.4.19)</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SI_USER</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A user process via <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">raise()</span></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGBUS</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>BUS_ADRALN</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Invalid address alignment</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>BUS_ADRERR</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Nonexistent physical address</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>BUS_MCEERR_AO</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Hardware memory error; action optional (since Linux 2.6.32)</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>BUS_MCEERR_AR</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Hardware memory error; action required (since Linux 2.6.32)</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>BUS_OBJERR</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Object-specific hardware error</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGCHLD</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>CLD_CONTINUED</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Child continued by <tt>SIGCONT</tt> (since Linux 2.6.9)</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>CLD_DUMPED</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Child terminated abnormally, with core dump</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>CLD_EXITED</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Child exited</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>CLD_KILLED</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Child terminated abnormally, without core dump</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>CLD_STOPPED</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Child stopped</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>CLD_TRAPPED</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Traced child has stopped</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGFPE</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>FPE_FLTDIV</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Floating-point divide-by-zero</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>FPE_FLTINV</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Invalid floating-point operation</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>FPE_FLTOVF</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Floating-point overflow</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>FPE_FLTRES</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Floating-point inexact result</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>FPE_FLTUND</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Floating-point underflow</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>FPE_INTDIV</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Integer divide-by-zero</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>FPE_INTOVF</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Integer overflow</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>FPE_SUB</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Subscript out of range</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGILL</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ILL_BADSTK</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Internal stack error</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ILL_COPROC</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Coprocessor error</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ILL_ILLADR</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Illegal addressing mode</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ILL_ILLOPC</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Illegal opcode</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ILL_ILLOPN</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Illegal operand</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ILL_ILLTRP</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Illegal trap</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ILL_PRVOPC</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Privileged opcode</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ILL_PRVREG</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Privileged register</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGPOLL</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLL_ERR</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">I/O error</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGIO</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLL_HUP</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Device disconnected</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLL_IN</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Input data available</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLL_MSG</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Input message available</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLL_OUT</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Output buffers available</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLL_PRI</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">High-priority input available</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGSEGV</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SEGV_ACCERR</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Invalid permissions for mapped object</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SEGV_MAPERR</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Address not mapped to object</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SIGTRAP</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>TRAP_BRANCH</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Process branch trap</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>TRAP_BRKPT</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Process breakpoint</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>TRAP_HWBKPT</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Hardware breakpoint/watchpoint</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>TRAP_TRACE</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Process trace trap</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ELOCK">21.4.1.2. The <span class="docEmphasis">ucontext</span> argument</h5><p class="docText">The final argument passed to a handler established with the <tt>SA_SIGINFO</tt> flag, <span class="docEmphasis">ucontext</span>, is a pointer to a structure of type <span class="docEmphasis">ucontext_t</span> (defined in <tt>&lt;ucontext.h&gt;</tt>). (SUSv3 uses a <span class="docEmphasis">void</span>
 pointer for this argument because it doesn’t specify any of the details
 of the argument.) This structure provides so-called user-context 
information describing the process state prior to invocation of the 
signal handler, including the previous process signal mask and saved 
register values (e.g., program counter and stack pointer). This 
information is rarely used in signal handlers, so we don’t go into 
further details.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Another use of <span class="docEmphasis">ucontext_t</span> structures is with the functions <span class="docEmphasis">getcontext()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">makecontext()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">setcontext()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">swapcontext()</span>,
 which allow a process to retrieve, create, change, and swap execution 
contexts, respectively. (These operations are somewhat like <span class="docEmphasis">setjmp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span>,
 but more general.) These functions can be used to implement coroutines,
 where the thread of execution of a process alternates between two (or 
more) functions. SUSv3 specifies these functions, but marks them 
obsolete. SUSv4 removes the specifications, and suggests that 
applications should be rewritten to use POSIX threads instead. The <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> manual provides further information about these functions.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
