<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>21.5. Interruption and Restarting of System Calls</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">21.5. Interruption and Restarting of System Calls</h3><p class="docText">Consider the following scenario:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">We establish a handler for some signal.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">We make a blocking system call, for example, a <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> from a terminal device, which blocks until input is supplied.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">While the system call is blocked, the signal for which we established a handler is delivered, and its signal handler is invoked.</p></div></li></ol></div><p class="docText">What happens after the signal handler returns? By default, the system call fails with the error <tt>EINTR</tt> (“Interrupted function”). This can be a useful feature. In Section 23.3, we’ll see how to use a timer (which results in the delivery of a <tt>SIGALRM</tt> signal) to set a timeout on a blocking system call such as <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>.</p><p class="docText">Often,
 however, we would prefer to continue the execution of an interrupted 
system call. To do this, we could use code such as the following to 
manually restart a system call in the event that it is interrupted by a 
signal handler:</p><pre>while ((cnt = read(fd, buf, BUF_SIZE)) == -1 &amp;&amp; errno == EINTR)
    continue;                 /* Do nothing loop body */

if (cnt == -1)                /* read() failed with other than EINTR */
    errExit("read");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If we frequently write code such as the above, it can be useful to define a macro such as the following:</p><pre>#define NO_EINTR(stmt) while ((stmt) == -1 &amp;&amp; errno == EINTR);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Using this macro, we can rewrite the earlier <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> call as follows:</p><pre>NO_EINTR(cnt = read(fd, buf, BUF_SIZE));

if (cnt == -1)                /* read() failed with other than EINTR */
    errExit("read");</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The GNU C library provides a (nonstandard) macro with the same purpose as our <tt>NO_EINTR()</tt> macro in <tt>&lt;unistd.h&gt;</tt>. The macro is called <tt>TEMP_FAILURE_RETRY()</tt> and is made available if the <tt>_GNU_SOURCE</tt> feature test macro is defined.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Even if we employ a macro like <tt>NO_EINTR()</tt>,
 having signal handlers interrupt system calls can be inconvenient, 
since we must add code to each blocking system call (assuming that we 
want to restart the call in each case). Instead, we can specify the <tt>SA_RESTART</tt> flag when establishing the signal handler with <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span>,
 so that system calls are automatically restarted by the kernel on the 
process’s behalf. This means that we don’t need to handle a possible <tt>EINTR</tt> error return for these system calls.</p><p class="docText">The <tt>SA_RESTART</tt>
 flag is a per-signal setting. In other words, we can allow handlers for
 some signals to interrupt blocking system calls, while others permit 
automatic restarting of system calls.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ED6AK">21.5.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EH6AK">21.5.1.1. System calls (and library functions) for which <tt>SA_RESTART</tt> is effective</h5><p class="docText">Unfortunately, not all blocking system calls automatically restart as a result of specifying <tt>SA_RESTART</tt>. The reasons for this are partly historical:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Restarting of system calls was introduced in 4.2BSD, and covered interrupted calls to <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">waitpid()</span>, as well as the following I/O system calls: <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">readv()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">writev()</span>, and blocking <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> operations. The I/O system calls are interruptible, and hence automatically restarted by <tt>SA_RESTART</tt>
 only when operating on a “slow” device. Slow devices include terminals,
 pipes, FIFOs, and sockets. On these file types, various I/O operations 
may block. (By contrast, disk files don’t fall into the category of slow
 devices, because disk I/O operations generally can be immediately 
satisfied via the buffer cache. If a disk I/O is required, the kernel 
puts the process to sleep until the I/O completes.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">A
 number of other blocking system calls are derived from System V, which 
did not initially provide for restarting of system calls.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">On
 Linux, the following blocking system calls (and library functions 
layered on top of system calls) are automatically restarted if 
interrupted by a signal handler established using the <tt>SA_RESTART</tt> flag:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The system calls used to wait for a child process (Section 26.1): <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">waitpid()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">wait3()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">wait4()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">waitid()</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The I/O system calls <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">readv()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">writev()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span>
 when applied to “slow” devices. In cases where data has already been 
partially transferred at the time of signal delivery, the input and 
output system calls will be interrupted, but return a success status: an
 integer indicating how many bytes were successfully transferred.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> system call, in cases where it can block (e.g., when opening FIFOs, as described in Section 44.7).</p></li><li><p class="docList">Various system calls used with sockets: <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">accept4()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">connect()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">send()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">sendmsg()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">sendto()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">recv()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">recvfrom()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">recvmsg()</span>. (On Linux, these system calls are not automatically restarted if a timeout has been set on the socket using <span class="docEmphasis">setsockopt()</span>. See the <span class="docEmphasis">signal(7)</span> manual page for details.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">The system calls used for I/O on POSIX message queues: <span class="docEmphasis">mq_receive()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">mq_timedreceive()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">mq_send()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">mq_timedsend()</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The system calls and library functions used to place file locks: <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">lockf()</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>FUTEX_WAIT</tt> operation of the Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">futex()</span> system call.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sem_timedwait()</span> functions used to decrement a POSIX semaphore. (On some UNIX implementations, <span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait() is</span> restarted if the <tt>SA_RESTART</tt> flag is specified.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">The functions used to synchronize POSIX threads: <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_mutex_lock()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_mutex_trylock()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_mutex_timedlock()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_wait()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_timedwait()</span>.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">In kernels before 2.6.22, <span class="docEmphasis">futex()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">sem_timedwait()</span> always failed with the error <tt>EINTR</tt> when interrupted, regardless of the setting of the <tt>SA_RESTART</tt> flag.</p><p class="docText">The
 following blocking system calls (and library functions layered on top 
of system calls) are never automatically restarted (even if <tt>SA_RESTART</tt> is specified):</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ppoll()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">pselect()</span> I/O multiplexing calls. (SUSv3 explicitly states that the behavior of <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">pselect()</span> when interrupted by a signal handler is unspecified, regardless of the setting of <tt>SA_RESTART</tt>.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">The Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">epoll_wait()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">epoll_pwait()</span> system calls.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">io_getevents()</span> system call.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The blocking system calls used with System V message queues and semaphores: <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">semtimedop()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">msgrcv()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">msgsnd()</span>.
 (Although System V did not originally provide automatic restarting of 
system calls, on some UNIX implementations, these system calls <span class="docEmphasis">are</span> restarted if the <tt>SA_RESTART</tt> flag is specified.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">A <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> from an <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> file descriptor.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The system calls and library functions designed to suspend execution of a program for a specified period: <span class="docEmphasis">sleep()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">clock_nanosleep()</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The system calls designed specifically to wait until a signal is delivered: <span class="docEmphasis">pause()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">sigsuspend()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">sigtimedwait()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">sigwaitinfo()</span>.</p></li></ul><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ESRBK">21.5.1.2. Modifying the <tt>SA_RESTART</tt> flag for a signal</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">siginterrupt()</span> function changes the <tt>SA_RESTART</tt> setting associated with a signal.</p><pre>#include &lt;signal.h&gt;

int <b>siginterrupt</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">flag</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If <span class="docEmphasis">flag</span> is true (1), then a handler for the signal <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span> will interrupt blocking system calls. If <span class="docEmphasis">flag</span> is false (0), then blocking system calls will be restarted after execution of a handler for <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">siginterrupt()</span> function works by using <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span> to fetch a copy of the signal’s current disposition, tweaking the <tt>SA_RESTART</tt> flag in the returned <span class="docEmphasis">oldact</span> structure, and then calling <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span> once more to update the signal’s disposition.</p><p class="docText">SUSv4 marks <span class="docEmphasis">siginterrupt()</span> obsolete, recommending the use of <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span> instead for this purpose.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EWXBK">21.5.1.3. Unhandled stop signals can generate <tt>EINTR</tt> for some Linux system calls</h5><p class="docText">On Linux, certain blocking system calls can return <tt>EINTR</tt> even in the absence of a signal handler. This can occur if the system call is blocked and the process is stopped by a signal (<tt>SIGSTOP</tt>, <tt>SIGTSTP</tt>, <tt>SIGTTIN</tt>, or <tt>SIGTTOU</tt>), and then resumed by delivery of a <tt>SIGCONT</tt> signal.</p><p class="docText">The following system calls and functions exhibit this behavior: <span class="docEmphasis">epoll_pwait()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">epoll_wait()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> from an <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> file descriptor, <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">semtimedop()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">sigtimedwait()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">sigwaitinfo()</span>.</p><p class="docText">In kernels before 2.6.24, <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> also exhibited this behavior, as did <span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait(), sem_timedwait(), futex(FUTEX_WAIT</span>), in kernels before 2.6.22, <span class="docEmphasis">msgrcv()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">msgsnd()</span> in kernels before 2.6.9, and <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span> in Linux 2.4 and earlier.</p><p class="docText">In Linux 2.4 and earlier, <span class="docEmphasis">sleep()</span> can also be interrupted in this manner, but, instead of returning an error, it returns the number of remaining unslept seconds.</p><p class="docText">The
 upshot of this behavior is that if there is a chance that our program 
may be stopped and restarted by signals, then we may need to include 
code to restart these system calls, even in a program that doesn’t 
install handlers for the stop signals.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
