<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>21.6. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">21.6. Summary</h3><p class="docText">In this chapter, we considered a range of factors that affect the operation and design of signal handlers.</p><p class="docText">Because
 signals are not queued, a signal handler must sometimes be coded to 
deal with the possibility that multiple events of a particular type have
 occurred, even though only one signal was delivered. The issue of 
reentrancy affects how we can update global variables and limits the set
 of functions that we can safely call from a signal handler.</p><p class="docText">Instead of returning, a signal handler can terminate in a variety of other ways, including calling <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span>, terminating the process by sending a signal (<span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">raise()</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">abort()</span>), or performing a nonlocal goto. Using <span class="docEmphasis">sigsetjmp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">siglongjmp()</span> provides a program with explicit control of the treatment of the process signal mask when a nonlocal goto is performed.</p><p class="docText">We can use <span class="docEmphasis">sigaltstack()</span>
 to define an alternate signal stack for a process. This is an area of 
memory that is used instead of the standard process stack when invoking a
 signal handler. An alternate signal stack is useful in cases where the 
standard stack has been exhausted by growing too large (at which point 
the kernel sends a <tt>SIGSEGV</tt> signal to the process).</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span> <tt>SA_SIGINFO</tt>
 flag allows us to establish a signal handler that receives additional 
information about a signal. This information is supplied via a <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span> structure whose address is passed as an argument to the signal handler.</p><p class="docText">When a signal handler interrupts a blocked system call, the system call fails with the error <tt>EINTR</tt>.
 We can take advantage of this behavior to, for example, set a timer on a
 blocking system call. Interrupted system calls can be manually 
restarted if desired. Alternatively, establishing the signal handler 
with the <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span> <tt>SA_RESTART</tt> flag causes many (but not all) system calls to be automatically restarted.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EH6AK">21.6.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EL6AK">21.6.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">See the sources listed in Section 20.15.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
