<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>22.1. Core Dump Files</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">22.1. Core Dump Files</h3><p class="docText">Certain signals cause a process to create a core dump and terminate (Table 20-1, page 396). A core dump is a file containing a memory image of the process at the time it terminated. (The term <span class="docEmphasis">core</span>
 derives from an old memory technology.) This memory image can be loaded
 into a debugger in order to examine the state of a program’s code and 
data at the moment when the signal arrived.</p><p class="docText">One way of causing a program to produce a core dump is to type the <span class="docEmphasis">quit</span> character (usually <span class="docEmphasis">Control-\</span>), which causes the <tt>SIGQUIT</tt> signal to be generated:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>ulimit -c unlimited </b>                       <i> Explained in main text</i>
$ <b>sleep 30 </b>
<i> Type Control-\</i>
Quit (core dumped)
$ <b>ls -l core </b>                                <i> Shows core dump file for</i> <span class="docEmphasis">sleep(1)</span>
-rw-------   1 mtk    users     57344 Nov 30 13:39 core

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In this example, the message <span class="docEmphasis">Quit (core dumped)</span> is printed by the shell, which detects that its child (the process running <span class="docEmphasis">sleep</span>) was killed by <tt>SIGQUIT</tt> and did a core dump.</p><p class="docText">The core dump file was created in the working directory of the process, with the name <tt>core</tt>. This is the default location and name for a core dump file; shortly, we explain how these defaults can be changed.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Many implementations provide a tool (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">gcore</span>
 on FreeBSD and Solaris) to obtain a core dump of a running process. 
Similar functionality is available on Linux by attaching to a running 
process using <span class="docEmphasis">gdb</span> and then using the <span class="docEmphasis">gcore</span> command.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJCBK">22.1.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ENCBK">22.1.1.1. Circumstances in which core dump files are not produced</h5><p class="docText">A core dump is not produced in the following circumstances:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The
 process doesn’t have permission to write the core dump file. This could
 happen because the process doesn’t have write permission for the 
directory in which the core dump file is to be created, or because a 
file with the same name already exists and either is not writable or is 
not a regular file (e.g., it is a directory or a symbolic link).</p></li><li><p class="docList">A regular file with the same name already exists, and is writable, but there is more than one (hard) link to the file.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The directory in which the core dump file is to be created doesn’t exist.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The process resource limit on the size of a core dump file is set to 0. This limit, <tt>RLIMIT_CORE</tt>, is discussed in more detail in Section 36.3. In the example above, we used the <span class="docEmphasis">ulimit</span> command (<span class="docEmphasis">limit</span> in the C shell) to ensure that there is no limit on the size of <tt>core</tt> files.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The process resource limit on the size of a file that may be produced by the process is set to 0. We describe this limit, <tt>RLIMIT_FSIZE</tt>, in Section 36.3.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The
 binary executable file that the process is executing doesn’t have read 
permission enabled. This prevents users from using a core dump to obtain
 a copy of the code of a program that they would otherwise be unable to 
read.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The 
file system on which the current working directory resides is mounted 
read-only, is full, or has run out of i-nodes. Alternatively, the user 
has reached their quota limit on the file system.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Set-user-ID
 (set-group-ID) programs executed by a user other than the file owner 
(group owner) don’t generate core dumps. This prevents malicious users 
from dumping the memory of a secure program and examining it for 
sensitive information such as passwords.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Using the <tt>PR_SET_DUMPABLE</tt> operation of the Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">prctl()</span> system call, we can set the <span class="docEmphasis">dumpable</span>
 flag for a process, so that when a set-user-ID (set-group-ID) program 
is run by a user other than the owner (group owner), a core dump can be 
produced. The <tt>PR_SET_DUMPABLE</tt> operation is available from Linux 2.4 onward. See the <span class="docEmphasis">prctl(2)</span> manual page for further details. In addition, since kernel 2.6.13, the <tt>/proc/sys/fs/suid_dumpable</tt>
 file provides system-wide control over whether or not set-user-ID and 
set-group-ID processes produce core dumps. For details, see the <span class="docEmphasis">proc(5)</span> manual page.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Since kernel 2.6.23, the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/coredump_filter</tt>
 can be used on a per-process basis to determine which types of memory 
mappings are written to a core dump file. (We explain memory mappings in
 Chapter 49.)
 The value in this file is a mask of four bits corresponding to the four
 types of memory mappings: private anonymous mappings, private file 
mappings, shared anonymous mappings, and shared file mappings. The 
default value of the file provides traditional Linux behavior: only 
private anonymous and shared anonymous mappings are dumped. See the <span class="docEmphasis">core(5)</span> manual page for further details.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EQGBK">22.1.1.2. Naming the core dump file: <tt>/proc/sys/kernel/core_pattern</tt></h5><p class="docText">Starting with Linux 2.6, the format string contained in the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/sys/kernel/core_pattern</tt> file controls the naming of all core dump files produced on the system. By default, this file contains the string <span class="docEmphasis">core</span>. A privileged user can define this file to include any of the format specifiers shown in Table 22-1.
 These format specifiers are replaced by the value indicated in the 
right column of the table. Additionally, the string may include slashes (<tt>/</tt>).
 In other words, we can control not just the name of the core file, but 
also the (absolute or relative) directory in which it is created. After 
all format specifiers have been replaced, the resulting pathname string 
is truncated to a maximum of 128 characters (64 characters before Linux 
2.6.19).</p><p class="docText">Since kernel 2.6.19, Linux supports an additional syntax in the <tt>core_pattern</tt> file. If this file contains a string starting with the pipe symbol (<tt>|</tt>), then the remaining characters in the file are interpreted as a program—with optional arguments that may include the <tt>%</tt> specifiers shown in Table 22-1—that
 is to be executed when a process dumps core. The core dump is written 
to the standard input of that program instead of to a file. See the <span class="docEmphasis">core(5)</span> manual page for further details.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Some other UNIX implementations provide facilities similar to <tt>core_pattern</tt>. For example, in BSD derivatives, the program name is appended to the filename, thus <tt>core.</tt><span class="docEmphasis">progname</span>. Solaris provides a tool (<span class="docEmphasis">coreadm</span>) that allows the user to choose the filename and directory where core dump files are placed.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 22-1. Format specifiers for <tt>/proc/sys/kernel/core_pattern</tt></h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Specifier</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Replaced by</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>%c</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Core file size soft resource limit (bytes; since Linux 2.6.24)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>%e</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Executable filename (without path prefix)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>%g</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Real group ID of dumped process</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>%h</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Name of host system</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>%p</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Process ID of dumped process</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>%s</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Number of signal that terminated process</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>%t</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Time of dump, in seconds since the Epoch</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>%u</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Real user ID of dumped process</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>%%</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A single <tt>%</tt> character</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
