<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>22.2. Special Cases for Delivery, Disposition, and Handling</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">22.2. Special Cases for Delivery, Disposition, and Handling</h3><p class="docText">For certain signals, special rules apply regarding delivery, disposition, and handling, as described in this section.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5CBK">22.2.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ECDBK">22.2.1.1. <tt>SIGKILL</tt> and <tt>SIGSTOP</tt></h5><p class="docText">It is not possible to change the default action for <tt>SIGKILL</tt>, which always terminates a process, and <tt>SIGSTOP</tt>, which always stops a process. Both <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span>
 return an error on attempts to change the disposition of these signals.
 These two signals also can’t be blocked. This is a deliberate design 
decision. Disallowing changes to the default actions of these signals 
means that they can always be used to kill or stop a runaway process.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EXDBK">22.2.1.2. <tt>SIGCONT</tt> and stop signals</h5><p class="docText">As noted earlier, the <tt>SIGCONT</tt> signal is used to continue a process previously stopped by one of the stop signals (<tt>SIGSTOP</tt>, <tt>SIGTSTP</tt>, <tt>SIGTTIN</tt>, and <tt>SIGTTOU</tt>). Because of their unique purpose, in certain situations the kernel deals with these signals differently from other signals.</p><p class="docText">If a process is currently stopped, the arrival of a <tt>SIGCONT</tt> signal always causes the process to resume, even if the process is currently blocking or ignoring <tt>SIGCONT</tt>.
 This feature is necessary because it would otherwise be impossible to 
resume such stopped processes. (If the stopped process was blocking <tt>SIGCONT</tt>, and had established a handler for <tt>SIGCONT</tt>, then, after the process is resumed, the handler is invoked only when <tt>SIGCONT</tt> is later unblocked.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">If
 any other signal is sent to a stopped process, the signal is not 
actually delivered to the process until it is resumed via receipt of a <tt>SIGCONT</tt> signal. The one exception is <tt>SIGKILL</tt>, which always kills a process—even one that is currently stopped.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Whenever <tt>SIGCONT</tt>
 is delivered to a process, any pending stop signals for the process are
 discarded (i.e., the process never sees them). Conversely, if any of 
the stop signals is delivered to a process, then any pending <tt>SIGCONT</tt> signal is automatically discarded. These steps are taken in order to prevent the action of a <tt>SIGCONT</tt> signal from being subsequently undone by a stop signal that was actually sent beforehand, and vice versa.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EBGBK">22.2.1.3. Don’t change the disposition of ignored terminal-generated signals</h5><p class="docText">If, at the time it was execed, a program finds that the disposition of a terminal-generated signals has been set to <tt>SIG_IGN</tt>
 (ignore), then generally the program should not attempt to change the 
disposition of the signal. This is not a rule enforced by the system, 
but rather a convention that should be followed when writing 
applications. We explain the reasons for this in Section 34.7.3. The signals for which this convention is relevant are <tt>SIGHUP</tt>, <tt>SIGINT</tt>, <tt>SIGQUIT</tt>, <tt>SIGTTIN</tt>, <tt>SIGTTOU</tt>, and <tt>SIGTSTP</tt>.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
