<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>22.3. Interruptible and Uninterruptible Process Sleep States</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">22.3. Interruptible and Uninterruptible Process Sleep States</h3><p class="docText">We need to add a proviso to our earlier statement that <tt>SIGKILL</tt> and <tt>SIGSTOP</tt>
 always act immediately on a process. At various times, the kernel may 
put a process to sleep, and two sleep states are distinguished:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><tt>TASK_INTERRUPTIBLE</tt>:
 The process is waiting for some event. For example, it is waiting for 
terminal input, for data to be written to a currently empty pipe, or for
 the value of a System V semaphore to be increased. A process may spend 
an arbitrary length of time in this state. If a signal is generated for a
 process in this state, then the operation is interrupted and the 
process is woken up by the delivery of a signal. When listed by <span class="docEmphasis">ps(1)</span>, processes in the <tt>TASK_INTERRUPTIBLE</tt> state are marked by the letter <span class="docEmphasis">S</span> in the STAT (process state) field.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>TASK_UNINTERRUPTIBLE</tt>:
 The process is waiting on certain special classes of event, such as the
 completion of a disk I/O. If a signal is generated for a process in 
this state, then the signal is not delivered until the process emerges 
from this state. Processes in the <tt>TASK_UNINTERRUPTIBLE</tt> state are listed by <span class="docEmphasis">ps(1)</span> with a <span class="docEmphasis">D</span> in the STAT field.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Because a process normally spends only very brief periods in the <tt>TASK_UNINTERRUPTIBLE</tt>
 state, the fact that a signal is delivered only when the process leaves
 this state is invisible. However, in rare circumstances, a process may 
remain hung in this state, perhaps as the result of a hardware failure, 
an NFS problem, or a kernel bug. In such cases, <tt>SIGKILL</tt>
 won’t terminate the hung process. If the underlying problem can’t 
otherwise be resolved, then we must restart the system in order to 
eliminate the process.</p><p class="docText">The <tt>TASK_INTERRUPTIBLE</tt> and <tt>TASK_UNINTERRUPTIBLE</tt>
 states are present on most UNIX implementations. Starting with kernel 
2.6.25, Linux adds a third state to address the hanging process problem 
just described:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><tt>TASK_KILLABLE</tt>: This state is like <tt>TASK_UNINTERRUPTIBLE</tt>,
 but wakes the process if a fatal signal (i.e., one that would kill the 
process) is received. By converting relevant parts of the kernel code to
 use this state, various scenarios where a hung process requires a 
system restart can be avoided. Instead, the process can be killed by 
sending it a fatal signal. The first piece of kernel code to be 
converted to use <tt>TASK_KILLABLE</tt> was NFS.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
