<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>22.4. Hardware-Generated Signals</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">22.4. Hardware-Generated Signals</h3><p class="docText"><tt>SIGBUS</tt>, <tt>SIGFPE</tt>, <tt>SIGILL</tt>, and <tt>SIGSEGV</tt> can be generated as a consequence of a hardware exception or, less usually, by being sent by <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span>.
 In the case of a hardware exception, SUSv3 specifies that the behavior 
of a process is undefined if it returns from a handler for the signal, 
or if it ignores or blocks the signal. The reasons for this are as 
follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Returning from the signal handler</span>:
 Suppose that a machine-language instruction generates one of these 
signals, and a signal handler is consequently invoked. On normal return 
from the handler, the program attempts to resume execution at the point 
where it was interrupted. But this is the very instruction that 
generated the signal in the first place, so the signal is generated once
 more. The consequence is usually that the program goes into an infinite
 loop, repeatedly calling the signal handler.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Ignoring the signal</span>:
 It makes little sense to ignore a hardware-generated signal, as it is 
unclear how a program should continue execution after, say, an 
arithmetic exception. When one of these signals is generated as a 
consequence of a hardware exception, Linux forces its delivery, even if 
the program has requested that the signal be ignored.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Blocking the signal</span>:
 As with the previous case, it makes little sense to block a 
hardware-generated signal, as it is unclear how a program should then 
continue execution. On Linux 2.4 and earlier, the kernel simply ignores 
attempts to block a hardware-generated signal; the signal is delivered 
to the process anyway, and then either terminates the process or is 
caught by a signal handler, if one has been established. Starting with 
Linux 2.6, if the signal is blocked, then the process is always 
immediately killed by that signal, even if the process has installed a 
handler for the signal. (The rationale for the Linux 2.6 change in the 
treatment of blocked hardware-generated signals was that the Linux 2.4 
behavior hid bugs and could cause deadlocks in threaded programs.)</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <tt>signals/demo_SIGFPE.c</tt> program in the source code distribution for this book can be used to demonstrate the results of ignoring or blocking <tt>SIGFPE</tt> or catching the signal with a handler that performs a normal return.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The
 correct way to deal with hardware-generated signals is either to accept
 their default action (process termination) or to write handlers that 
don’t perform a normal return. Other than returning normally, a handler 
can complete execution by calling <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span> to terminate the process or by calling <span class="docEmphasis">siglongjmp()</span> (Section 21.2.1) to ensure that control passes to some point in the program other than the instruction that generated the signal.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
