<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>22.8. Realtime Signals</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">22.8. Realtime Signals</h3><p class="docText">Realtime
 signals were defined in POSIX.1b to remedy a number of limitations of 
standard signals. They have the following advantages over standard 
signals:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Realtime
 signals provide an increased range of signals that can be used for 
application-defined purposes. Only two standard signals are freely 
available for application-defined purposes: <tt>SIGUSR1</tt> and <tt>SIGUSR2</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Realtime
 signals are queued. If multiple instances of a realtime signal are sent
 to a process, then the signal is delivered multiple times. By contrast,
 if we send further instances of a standard signal that is already 
pending for a process, that signal is delivered only once.</p></li><li><p class="docList">When
 sending a realtime signal, it is possible to specify data (an integer 
or pointer value) that accompanies the signal. The signal handler in the
 receiving process can retrieve this data.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The
 order of delivery of different realtime signals is guaranteed. If 
multiple different realtime signals are pending, then the 
lowest-numbered signal is delivered first. In other words, signals are 
prioritized, with lower-numbered signals having higher priority. When 
multiple signals of the same type are queued, they are delivered—along 
with their accompanying data—in the order in which they were sent.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">SUSv3 requires that an implementation provide a minimum of <tt>_POSIX_RTSIG_MAX</tt> (defined as 8) different realtime signals. The Linux kernel defines 32 different realtime signals, numbered from 32 to 63. The <tt>&lt;signal.h&gt;</tt> header file defines the constant <tt>RTSIG_MAX</tt> to indicate the number of available realtime signals, and the constants <tt>SIGRTMIN</tt> and <tt>SIGRTMAX</tt> to indicate the lowest and highest available realtime signal numbers.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On systems employing the LinuxThreads threading implementation, <tt>SIGRTMIN</tt>
 is defined as 35 (rather than 32) to allow for the fact that 
LinuxThreads makes internal use of the first three realtime signals. On 
systems employing the NPTL threading implementation, <tt>SIGRTMIN</tt> is defined as 34 to allow for the fact that NPTL makes internal use of the first two realtime signals.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Realtime
 signals are not individually identified by different constants in the 
manner of standard signals. However, an application should not hard-code
 integer values for them, since the range used for realtime signals 
varies across UNIX implementations. Instead, a realtime signal number 
can be referred to by adding a value to <tt>SIGRTMIN</tt>; for example, the expression (<span class="docEmphasis">SIGRTMIN + 1</span>) refers to the second realtime signal.</p><p class="docText">Be aware that SUSv3 doesn’t require <tt>SIGRTMAX</tt> and <tt>SIGRTMIN</tt>
 to be simple integer values. They may be defined as functions (as they 
are on Linux). This means that we can’t write code for the preprocessor 
such as the following:</p><pre>#if SIGRTMIN+100 &gt; SIGRTMAX             /* WRONG! */
#error "Not enough realtime signals"
#endif</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Instead, we must perform equivalent checks at run time.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGIBK">22.8.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EKIBK">22.8.1.1. Limits on the number of queued realtime signals</h5><p class="docText">Queuing
 realtime signals (with associated data) requires that the kernel 
maintain data structures listing the signals queued to each process. 
Since these data structures consume kernel memory, the kernel places 
limits on the number of realtime signals that may be queued.</p><p class="docText">SUSv3
 allows an implementation to place an upper limit on the number of 
realtime signals (of all types) that may be queued to a process, and 
requires that this limit be at least <tt>_POSIX_SIGQUEUE_MAX</tt> (defined as 32). An implementation can define the constant <tt>SIGQUEUE_MAX</tt>
 to indicate the number of realtime signals it allows to be queued. It 
can also make this information available through the following call:</p><pre>lim = sysconf(_SC_SIGQUEUE_MAX);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">On Linux, this call returns 
-1. The reason for this is that Linux employs a different model for 
limiting the number of realtime signals that may be queued to a process.
 In Linux versions up to and including 2.6.7, the kernel enforces a 
system-wide limit on the total number of realtime signals that may be 
queued to all processes. This limit can be viewed and (with privilege) 
changed via the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/sys/kernel/rtsig-max</tt>
 file. The default value in this file is 1024. The number of currently 
queued realtime signals can be found in the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/sys/kernel/rtsig-nr</tt> file.</p><p class="docText">Starting with Linux 2.6.8, this model was changed, and the aforementioned <tt>/proc</tt> interfaces were removed. Under the new model, the <tt>RLIMIT_SIGPENDING</tt>
 soft resource limit defines a limit on the number of signals that can 
be queued to all processes owned by a particular real user ID. We 
describe this limit further in Section 36.3.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EYLBK">22.8.1.2. Using realtime signals</h5><p class="docText">In order for a pair of processes to send and receive realtime signals, SUSv3 requires the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The sending process sends the signal plus its accompanying data using the <span class="docEmphasis">sigqueue()</span> system call.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">A realtime signal can also be sent using <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">killpg()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">raise()</span>.
 However, SUSv3 leaves it as implementation-dependent whether realtime 
signals sent using these interfaces are queued. On Linux, these 
interfaces do queue realtime signals, but on many other UNIX 
implementations, they do not.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li><li><p class="docList">The receiving process establishes a handler for the signal using a call to <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span> that specifies the <tt>SA_SIGINFO</tt>
 flag. This causes the signal handler to be invoked with additional 
arguments, one of which includes the data accompanying the realtime 
signal.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On Linux, it is possible to queue realtime signals even if the receiving process doesn’t specify the <tt>SA_SIGINFO</tt>
 flag when establishing the signal handler (although it is not then 
possible to obtain the data associated with the signal in this case). 
However, SUSv3 doesn’t require implementations to guarantee this 
behavior, so we can’t portably rely on it.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li></ul><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETOBK">22.8.2. Sending Realtime Signals</h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sigqueue()</span> system call sends the realtime signal specified by <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span> to the process specified by <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>.</p><pre>#define _POSIX_C_SOURCE 199309
#include &lt;signal.h&gt;

int <b>sigqueue</b>(pid_t <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span>, const union sigval <span class="docEmphasis">value</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The same permissions are required to send a signal using <span class="docEmphasis">sigqueue()</span> as are required with <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span> (see Section 20.5). A null signal (i.e., signal 0) can be sent, with the same meaning as for <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span>. (Unlike <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span>, we can’t use <span class="docEmphasis">sigqueue()</span> to send a signal to an entire process group by specifying a negative value in <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>.)</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E1QBK">Example 22-2. Using <span class="docEmphasis">sigqueue()</span> to send realtime signals</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>signals/t_sigqueue.c</b>
#define _POSIX_C_SOURCE 199309
#include &lt;signal.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int sig, numSigs, j, sigData;
    union sigval sv;

    if (argc &lt; 4 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s pid sig-num data [num-sigs]\n", argv[0]);

    /* Display our PID and UID, so that they can be compared with the
       corresponding fields of the siginfo_t argument supplied to the
       handler in the receiving process */

    printf("%s: PID is %ld, UID is %ld\n", argv[0],
            (long) getpid(), (long) getuid());

    sig = getInt(argv[2], 0, "sig-num");
    sigData = getInt(argv[3], GN_ANY_BASE, "data");
    numSigs = (argc &gt; 4) ? getInt(argv[4], GN_GT_0, "num-sigs") : 1;

    for (j = 0; j &lt; numSigs; j++) {
        sv.sival_int = sigData + j;
        if (sigqueue(getLong(argv[1], 0, "pid"), sig, sv) == -1)
            errExit("sigqueue %d", j);
    }

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>signals/t_sigqueue.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">value</span> argument specifies the data to accompany the signal. This argument has the following form:</p><pre>union sigval {
    int   sival_int;      /* Integer value for accompanying data */
    void *sival_ptr;      /* Pointer value for accompanying data */
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The interpretation of this argument is application-dependent, as is the choice of whether to set the <span class="docEmphasis">sival_int</span> or the <span class="docEmphasis">sival_ptr</span> field of the union. The <span class="docEmphasis">sival_ptr</span> field is seldom useful with <span class="docEmphasis">sigqueue()</span>,
 since a pointer value that is useful in one process is rarely 
meaningful in another process. However, this field is useful in other 
functions that employ <span class="docEmphasis">sigval</span> unions, as we’ll see when we consider POSIX timers in Section 23.6 and POSIX message queue notification in Section 52.6.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Several UNIX implementations, including Linux, define a <span class="docEmphasis">sigval_t</span> data type as a synonym for <span class="docEmphasis">union sigval</span>.
 However, this type is not specified in SUSv3 and is not available on 
some implementations. Portable applications should avoid using it.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">A call to <span class="docEmphasis">sigqueue()</span> may fail if the limit on the number of queued signals has been reached. In this case, <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> is set to <tt>EAGAIN</tt>,
 indicating that we need to send the signal again (at some later time 
when some of the currently queued signals have been delivered).</p><p class="docText">An example of the use of <span class="docEmphasis">sigqueue()</span> is provided in Example 22-2
 (page 459). This program takes up to four arguments, of which the first
 three are mandatory: a signal number, a target process ID, and an 
integer value to accompany the realtime signal. If more than one 
instance of the specified signal is to be sent, the optional fourth 
argument specifies the number of instances; in this case, the 
accompanying integer data value is incremented by one for each 
successive signal. We demonstrate the use of this program in Section 22.8.2.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EETBK">22.8.3. Handling Realtime Signals</h4><p class="docText">We
 can handle realtime signals just like standard signals, using a normal 
(single-argument) signal handler. Alternatively, we can handle a 
realtime signal using a three-argument signal handler established using 
the <tt>SA_SIGINFO</tt> flag (Section 21.4). Here is an example of using <tt>SA_SIGINFO</tt> to establish a handler for the sixth realtime signal:</p><pre>struct sigaction act;

sigemptyset(&amp;act.sa_mask);
act.sa_sigaction = handler;
act.sa_flags = SA_RESTART | SA_SIGINFO;

if (sigaction(SIGRTMIN + 5, &amp;act, NULL) == -1)
    errExit("sigaction");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">When we employ the <tt>SA_SIGINFO</tt> flag, the second argument passed to the signal handler is a <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span>
 structure that contains additional information about the realtime 
signal. We described this structure in detail in Section 21.4. For a 
realtime signal, the following fields are set in the <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span> structure:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">si_signo</span> field is the same value as is passed in the first argument of the signal handler.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">si_code</span> field indicates the source of the signal, and contains one of the values shown in Table 21-2 (page 441). For a realtime signal sent via <span class="docEmphasis">sigqueue()</span>, this field always has the value <tt>SI_QUEUE</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">si_value</span> field contains the data specified in the <span class="docEmphasis">value</span> argument (the <span class="docEmphasis">sigval</span> union) by the process that sent the signal using <span class="docEmphasis">sigqueue()</span>. As noted already, the interpretation of this data is application-defined. (The <span class="docEmphasis">si_value</span> field doesn’t contain valid information if the signal was sent using <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span>.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">si_pid</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">si_uid</span> fields contain, respectively, the process ID and real user ID of the process sending the signal.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Example 22-3 provides an example of handling realtime signals. This program catches signals and displays various fields from the <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span>
 structure passed to the signal handler. The program takes two optional 
integer command-line arguments. If the first argument is supplied, the 
main program blocks all signals, and then sleeps for the number of 
seconds specified by this argument. During this time, we can queue 
multiple realtime signals to the process and observe what happens when 
the signals are unblocked. The second argument specifies the number of 
seconds that the signal handler should sleep before returning. 
Specifying a nonzero value (the default is 1 second) is useful for 
slowing down the program so that we can more easily see what is 
happening when multiple signals are handled.</p><p class="docText">We can use the program in Example 22-3, along with the program in Example 22-2 (<tt>t_sigqueue.c</tt>) to explore the behavior of realtime signals, as shown in the following shell session log:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>./catch_rtsigs 60 &amp; </b>
[1] 12842
$ ./catch_rtsigs: PID is 12842        <i> Shell prompt mixed with program output</i>
./catch_rtsigs: signals blocked - sleeping 60 seconds
<i> Press Enter to see next shell prompt</i>
$ <b>./t_sigqueue 12842 54 100 3 </b>         <i> Send signal three times</i>
./t_sigqueue: PID is 12843, UID is 1000
$ <b>./t_sigqueue 12842 43 200 </b>
./t_sigqueue: PID is 12844, UID is 1000
$ <b>./t_sigqueue 12842 40 300 </b>
./t_sigqueue: PID is 12845, UID is 1000

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Eventually, the <span class="docEmphasis">catch_rtsigs</span>
 program completes sleeping, and displays messages as the signal handler
 catches various signals. (We see a shell prompt mixed with the next 
line of the program’s output because the <span class="docEmphasis">catch_rtsigs</span>
 program is writing output from the background.) We first observe that 
realtime signals are delivered lowest-numbered signal first, and that 
the <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span> structure passed to the handler includes the process ID and user ID of the process that sent the signal:</p><pre>$ ./catch_rtsigs: sleep complete
caught signal 40
    si_signo=40, si_code=-1 (SI_QUEUE), si_value=300
    si_pid=12845, si_uid=1000
caught signal 43
    si_signo=43, si_code=-1 (SI_QUEUE), si_value=200
    si_pid=12844, si_uid=1000</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The remaining output is produced by the three instances of the same realtime signal. Looking at the <span class="docEmphasis">si_value</span> values, we can see that these signals were delivered in the order they were sent:</p><pre>caught signal 54
    si_signo=54, si_code=-1 (SI_QUEUE), si_value=100
    si_pid=12843, si_uid=1000
caught signal 54
    si_signo=54, si_code=-1 (SI_QUEUE), si_value=101
    si_pid=12843, si_uid=1000
caught signal 54
    si_signo=54, si_code=-1 (SI_QUEUE), si_value=102
    si_pid=12843, si_uid=1000</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We continue by using the shell <span class="docEmphasis">kill</span> command to send a signal to the <span class="docEmphasis">catch_rtsigs</span> program. As before, we see that the <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span> structure received by the handler includes the process ID and user ID of the sending process, but in this case, the <span class="docEmphasis">si_code</span> value is <tt>SI_USER</tt>:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth"><i> Press Enter to see next shell prompt</i>
$ <b>echo $$ </b>                             <i> Display PID of shell</i>
12780
$ <b>kill -40 12842 </b>                      <i> Uses</i> kill(2) <i> to send a signal</i>
$ caught signal 40
    si_signo=40, si_code=0 (SI_USER), si_value=0
    si_pid=12780, si_uid=1000         <i> PID is that of the shell</i>
<i> Press Enter to see next shell prompt</i>
$ <b>kill 12842 </b>                          <i> Kill</i> catch_rtsigs <i> by sending</i> SIGTERM
Caught 6 signals
<i> Press Enter to see notification from shell about terminated background job</i>
[1]+  Done                    ./catch_rtsigs 60

					  </pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EY2BK">Example 22-3. Handling realtime signals</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>signals/catch_rtsigs.c</b>
#define _GNU_SOURCE
#include &lt;string.h&gt;
#include &lt;signal.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

static volatile int handlerSleepTime;
static volatile int sigCnt = 0;         /* Number of signals received */
static volatile int allDone = 0;

static void             /* Handler for signals established using SA_SIGINFO */
siginfoHandler(int sig, siginfo_t *si, void *ucontext)
{
    /* UNSAFE: This handler uses non-async-signal-safe functions
       (printf()); see Section 21.1.2) */

    /* SIGINT or SIGTERM can be used to terminate program */

    if (sig == SIGINT || sig == SIGTERM) {
        allDone = 1;
        return;
    }

    sigCnt++;
    printf("caught signal %d\n", sig);

    printf("    si_signo=%d, si_code=%d (%s), ", si-&gt;si_signo, si-&gt;si_code,
            (si-&gt;si_code == SI_USER) ? "SI_USER" :
            (si-&gt;si_code == SI_QUEUE) ? "SI_QUEUE" : "other");
    printf("si_value=%d\n", si-&gt;si_value.sival_int);
    printf("    si_pid=%ld, si_uid=%ld\n", (long) si-&gt;si_pid, (long) si-&gt;si_uid);

    sleep(handlerSleepTime);
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    struct sigaction sa;
    int sig;
    sigset_t prevMask, blockMask;

    if (argc &gt; 1 &amp;&amp; strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s [block-time [handler-sleep-time]]\n", argv[0]);

    printf("%s: PID is %ld\n", argv[0], (long) getpid());

    handlerSleepTime = (argc &gt; 2) ?
                getInt(argv[2], GN_NONNEG, "handler-sleep-time") : 1;

    /* Establish handler for most signals. During execution of the handler,
       mask all other signals to prevent handlers recursively interrupting
       each other (which would make the output hard to read). */

    sa.sa_sigaction = siginfoHandler;
    sa.sa_flags = SA_SIGINFO;
    sigfillset(&amp;sa.sa_mask);

    for (sig = 1; sig &lt; NSIG; sig++)
        if (sig != SIGTSTP &amp;&amp; sig != SIGQUIT)
            sigaction(sig, &amp;sa, NULL);

    /* Optionally block signals and sleep, allowing signals to be
       sent to us before they are unblocked and handled */

    if (argc &gt; 1) {
        sigfillset(&amp;blockMask);
        sigdelset(&amp;blockMask, SIGINT);
        sigdelset(&amp;blockMask, SIGTERM);

        if (sigprocmask(SIG_SETMASK, &amp;blockMask, &amp;prevMask) == -1)
            errExit("sigprocmask");

        printf("%s: signals blocked - sleeping %s seconds\n", argv[0], argv[1]);
        sleep(getInt(argv[1], GN_GT_0, "block-time"));
        printf("%s: sleep complete\n", argv[0]);

        if (sigprocmask(SIG_SETMASK, &amp;prevMask, NULL) == -1)
            errExit("sigprocmask");
    }

    while (!allDone)                    /* Wait for incoming signals */
        pause();
}
     <b>signals/catch_rtsigs.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
