<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>22.12. Interprocess Communication with Signals</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">22.12. Interprocess Communication with Signals</h3><p class="docText">From
 one viewpoint, we can consider signals as a form of interprocess 
communication (IPC). However, signals suffer a number of limitations as 
an IPC mechanism. First, by comparison with other methods of IPC that we
 examine in later chapters, programming with signals is cumbersome and 
difficult. The reasons for this are as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The
 asynchronous nature of signals means that we face various problems, 
including reentrancy requirements, race conditions, and the correct 
handling of global variables from signal handlers. (Most of these 
problems do not occur if we are using <span class="docEmphasis">sigwaitinfo()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">signalfd()</span> to synchronously fetch signals.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">Standard
 signals are not queued. Even for realtime signals, there are upper 
limits on the number of signals that may be queued. This means that in 
order to avoid loss of information, the process receiving the signals 
must have a method of informing the sender that it is ready to receive 
another signal. The most obvious method of doing this is for the 
receiver to send a signal to the sender.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">A
 further problem is that signals carry only a limited amount of 
information: the signal number, and in the case of realtime signals, a 
word (an integer or a pointer) of additional data. This low bandwidth 
makes signals slow by comparison with other methods of IPC such as 
pipes.</p><p class="docText">As a consequence of the above limitations, signals are rarely used for IPC.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
