<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>22.13. Earlier Signal APIs (System V and BSD)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">22.13. Earlier Signal APIs (System V and BSD)</h3><p class="docText">Our
 discussion of signals has focused on the POSIX signal API. We now 
briefly look at the historical APIs provided by System V and BSD. 
Although all new applications should use the POSIX API, we may encounter
 these obsolete APIs when porting (usually older) applications from 
other UNIX implementations. Because Linux (like many other UNIX 
implementations) provides System V and BSD compatibility APIs, often all
 that is required to port programs using these older APIs is to 
recompile them on Linux.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EVQBK">22.13.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EZQBK">22.13.1.1. The System V signal API</h5><p class="docText">As noted earlier, one important difference in the System V signal API is that when a handler is established with <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span>,
 we get the older, unreliable signal semantics. This means that the 
signal is not added to the process signal mask, the disposition of the 
signal is reset to the default when the handler is called, and system 
calls are not automatically restarted.</p><p class="docText">Below,
 we briefly describe the functions in the System V signal API. The 
manual pages provide full details. SUSv3 specifies all of these 
functions, but notes that the modern POSIX equivalents are preferred. 
SUSv4 marks these functions obsolete.</p><pre>#define _XOPEN_SOURCE 500
#include &lt;signal.h&gt;

void (*<b>sigset </b>(int <i> sig</i>, void (*<i> handler</i>)(int)))(int);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On success: returns the previous disposition of <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span>, or <tt>SIG_HOLD</tt> if <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span> was previously blocked; on error -1 is returned</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">To establish a signal handler with reliable semantics, System V provided the <span class="docEmphasis">sigset()</span> call (with a prototype similar to that of <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span>). As with <span class="docEmphasis">signal()</span>, the <span class="docEmphasis">handler</span> argument for <span class="docEmphasis">sigset()</span> can be specified as <tt>SIG_IGN, SIG_DFL</tt>, or the address of a signal handler. Alternatively, it can be specified as <tt>SIG_HOLD</tt>, to add the signal to the process signal mask while leaving the disposition of the signal unchanged.</p><p class="docText">If <span class="docEmphasis">handler</span> is specified as anything other than <tt>SIG_HOLD</tt>, <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span> is removed from the process signal mask (i.e., if <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span> was blocked, it is unblocked).</p><pre>#define _XOPEN_SOURCE 500
#include &lt;signal.h&gt;

int <b>sighold</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span>);
int <b>sigrelse</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span>);
int <b>sigignore</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">All return 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><pre>int <b>sigpause </b>(int <i> sig</i>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Always returns -1 with <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> set to <tt>EINTR</tt></p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sighold()</span> function adds a signal to the process signal mask. The <span class="docEmphasis">sigrelse()</span> function removes a signal from the signal mask. The <span class="docEmphasis">sigignore()</span> function sets a signal’s disposition to <span class="docEmphasis">ignore</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">sigpause()</span> function is similar to <span class="docEmphasis">sigsuspend()</span>, but removes just one signal from the process signal mask before suspending the process until the arrival of a signal.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EBVBK">22.13.1.2. The BSD signal API</h5><p class="docText">The POSIX signal API drew heavily on the 4.2BSD API, so the BSD functions are mainly direct analogs of those in POSIX.</p><p class="docText">As
 with the functions in the System V signal API described above, we 
present the prototypes of the functions in the BSD signal API, and 
briefly explain the operation of each function. Once again, the manual 
pages provide full details.</p><pre>#define _BSD_SOURCE
#include &lt;signal.h&gt;

int <b>sigvec</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span>, struct sigvec *<span class="docEmphasis">vec</span>, struct sigvec *<span class="docEmphasis">ovec</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sigvec()</span> function is analogous to <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">vec</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ovec</span> arguments are pointers to structures of the following type:</p><pre>struct sigvec {
    void (*sv_handler)();
    int  sv_mask;
    int  sv_flags;
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The fields of the <span class="docEmphasis">sigvec</span> structure correspond closely with those of the <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction</span> structure. The first notable difference is that the <span class="docEmphasis">sv_mask</span> field (the analog of <span class="docEmphasis">sa_mask</span>) was an integer rather than a <span class="docEmphasis">sigset_t</span>,
 which meant that, on 32-bit architectures, there was a maximum of 31 
different signals. The other difference is the use of the <tt>SV_INTERRUPT</tt> flag in the <span class="docEmphasis">sv_flags</span> field (the analog of <span class="docEmphasis">sa_flags</span>).
 Since system call restarting was the default on 4.2BSD, this flag was 
used to specify that slow system calls should be interrupted by signal 
handlers. (This contrasts with the POSIX API, where we must explicitly 
specify <tt>SA_RESTART</tt> in order to enable restarting of system calls when establishing a signal handler with <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span>.)</p><pre>#define _BSD_SOURCE
#include &lt;signal.h&gt;

int <b>sigblock</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">mask</span>);
int <b>sigsetmask</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">mask</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Both return previous signal mask</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><pre>int <b>sigpause</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">sigmask</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Always returns -1 with <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> set to <tt>EINTR</tt></p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><pre>int <b>sigmask</b>(<span class="docEmphasis">sig</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns signal mask value with bit <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span> set</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sigblock()</span> function adds a set of signals to the process signal mask. It is analogous to the <span class="docEmphasis">sigprocmask()</span> <tt>SIG_BLOCK</tt> operation. The <span class="docEmphasis">sigsetmask()</span> call specifies an absolute value for the signal mask. It is analogous to the <span class="docEmphasis">sigprocmask()</span> <tt>SIG_SETMASK</tt> operation.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sigpause()</span> function is analogous to <span class="docEmphasis">sigsuspend()</span>.
 Note that this function is defined with different calling signatures in
 the System V and BSD APIs. The GNU C library provides the System V 
version by default, unless we specify the <tt>_BSD_SOURCE</tt> feature test macro when compiling a program.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sigmask()</span>
 macro turns a signal number into the corresponding 32-bit mask value. 
Such bit masks can then be ORed together to create a set of signals, as 
in the following:</p><pre>sigblock(sigmask(SIGINT) | sigmask(SIGQUIT));</pre><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
