<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>22.14. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">22.14. Summary</h3><p class="docText">Certain
 signals cause a process to create a core dump and terminate. Core dumps
 contain information that can be used by a debugger to inspect the state
 of a process at the time that it terminated. By default, a core dump 
file is named <tt>core</tt>, but Linux provides the <tt>/proc/sys/kernel/core_pattern</tt> file to control the naming of core dump files.</p><p class="docText">A
 signal may be generated asynchronously or synchronously. Asynchronous 
generation occurs when a signal is sent a process by the kernel or by 
another process. A process can’t predict precisely when an 
asynchronously generated signal will be delivered. (We noted that 
asynchronous signals are normally delivered the next time the receiving 
process switches from kernel mode to user mode.) Synchronous generation 
occurs when the process itself executes code that directly generates the
 signal—for example, by executing an instruction that causes a hardware 
exception or by calling <span class="docEmphasis">raise()</span>. The delivery of a synchronously generated signal is precisely predictable (it occurs immediately).</p><p class="docText">Realtime
 signals are a POSIX addition to the original signal model, and differ 
from standard signals in that they are queued, have a specified delivery
 order, and can be sent with an accompanying piece of data. Realtime 
signals are designed to be used for application-defined purposes. A 
realtime signal is sent using the <span class="docEmphasis">sigqueue()</span> system call, and an additional argument (the <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span>
 structure) is supplied to the signal handler so that it can obtain the 
data accompanying the signal, as well as the process ID and real user ID
 of the sending process.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sigsuspend()</span>
 system call allows a program to atomically modify the process signal 
mask and suspend execution until a signal arrives, The atomicity of <span class="docEmphasis">sigsuspend()</span> is essential to avoid race conditions when unblocking a signal and then suspending execution until that signal arrives.</p><p class="docText">We can use <span class="docEmphasis">sigwaitinfo()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sigtimedwait()</span>
 to synchronously wait for a signal. This saves us the work of designing
 and writing a signal handler, which may be unnecessary if our only aim 
is to wait for the delivery of a signal.</p><p class="docText">Like <span class="docEmphasis">sigwaitinfo()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sigtimedwait()</span>, the Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">signalfd()</span>
 system call can be used to synchronously wait for a signal. The 
distinctive feature of this interface is that signals can be read via a 
file descriptor. This file descriptor can also be monitored using <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>.</p><p class="docText">Although
 signals can be viewed as a method of IPC, many factors make them 
generally unsuitable for this purpose, including their asynchronous 
nature, the fact that they are not queued, and their low bandwidth. More
 usually, signals are used as a method of process synchronization and 
for a variety of other purposes (e.g., event notification, job control, 
and timer expiration).</p><p class="docText">Although
 the fundamental signal concepts are straightforward, our discussion has
 stretched over three chapters, since there were many details to cover. 
Signals play an important role in various parts of the system call API, 
and we’ll revisit their use in several later chapters. In addition, 
various signal-related functions are specific to threads (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_kill()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_sigmask()</span>), and we defer discussion of these functions until Section 33.2.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EPRBK">22.14.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ETRBK">22.14.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">See the sources listed in Section 20.15.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
