<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>22.15. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">22.15. Exercises</h3><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Section 22.2 noted that if a stopped process that has established a handler for and blocked <tt>SIGCONT</tt> is later resumed as a consequence of receiving a <tt>SIGCONT</tt>, then the handler is invoked only when <tt>SIGCONT</tt> is unblocked. Write a program to verify this. Recall that a process can be stopped by typing the terminal <span class="docEmphasis">suspend</span> character (usually <span class="docEmphasis">Control-Z</span>) and can be sent a <tt>SIGCONT</tt> signal using the command <span class="docEmphasis">kill -CONT</span> (or implicitly, using the shell <span class="docEmphasis">fg</span> command).</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If
 both a realtime and a standard signal are pending for a process, SUSv3 
leaves it unspecified which is delivered first. Write a program that 
shows what Linux does in this case. (Have the program set up a handler 
for all signals, block signals for a period time so that you can send 
various signals to it, and then unblock all signals.)</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Section 22.10 stated that accepting signals using <span class="docEmphasis">sigwaitinfo()</span> is faster than the use of a signal handler plus <span class="docEmphasis">sigsuspend()</span>. The program <tt>signals/sig_speed_sigsuspend.c</tt>, supplied in the source code distribution for this book, uses <span class="docEmphasis">sigsuspend()</span>
 to alternately send signals back and forward between a parent and a 
child process. Time the operation of this program to exchange one 
million signals between the two processes. (The number of signals to 
exchange is provided as a command-line argument to the program.) Create a
 modified version of the program that instead uses <span class="docEmphasis">sigwaitinfo()</span>, and time that version. What is the speed difference between the two programs?</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Implement the System V functions <span class="docEmphasis">sigset()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">sighold()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">sigrelse()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">sigignore()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">sigpause()</span> using the POSIX signal API.</p></div></li></ol></div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
