<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>23.2. Scheduling and Accuracy of Timers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">23.2. Scheduling and Accuracy of Timers</h3><p class="docText">Depending
 on system load and the scheduling of processes, a process may not be 
scheduled to run until some short time (i.e., usually some small 
fraction of a second) after actual expiration of the timer. 
Notwithstanding this, the expiration of a periodic timer established by <span class="docEmphasis">setitimer()</span>,
 or the other interfaces described later in this chapter, will remain 
regular. For example, if a real-time timer is set to expire every 2 
seconds, then the delivery of individual timer events may be subject to 
the delays just described, but the scheduling of subsequent expirations 
will nevertheless be at exactly the next 2-second interval. In other 
words, interval timers are not subject to creeping errors.</p><p class="docText">Although the <span class="docEmphasis">timeval</span> structure used by <span class="docEmphasis">setitimer()</span>
 allows for microsecond precision, the accuracy of a timer has 
traditionally been limited by the frequency of the software clock (Section 10.6).
 If a timer value does not exactly match a multiple of the granularity 
of the software clock, then the timer value is rounded up. This means 
that if, for example, we specified an interval timer to go off each 
19,100 microseconds (i.e., just over 19 milliseconds), then, assuming a 
jiffy value of 4 milliseconds, we would actually get a timer that 
expired every 20 milliseconds.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E2UBK">23.2.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E6UBK">23.2.1.1. High-resolution timers</h5><p class="docText">On
 modern Linux kernels, the preceding statement that timer resolution is 
limited by the frequency of the software clock no longer holds true. 
Since kernel 2.6.21, Linux optionally supports high-resolution timers. 
If this support is enabled (via the <tt>CONFIG_HIGH_RES_TIMERS</tt>
 kernel configuration option), then the accuracy of the various timer 
and sleep interfaces that we describe in this chapter is no longer 
constrained by the size of the kernel jiffy. Instead, these calls can be
 as accurate as the underlying hardware allows. On modern hardware, 
accuracy down to a microsecond is typical.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The availability of high-resolution timers can be determined by examining the clock resolution returned by <span class="docEmphasis">clock_getres()</span>, described in Section 23.5.1.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
