<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>23.3. Setting Timeouts on Blocking Operations</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">23.3. Setting Timeouts on Blocking Operations</h3><p class="docText">One
 use of real-time timers is to place an upper limit on the time for 
which a blocking system call can remain blocked. For example, we may 
wish to cancel a <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> from a terminal if the user has not entered a line of input within a certain time. We can do this as follows:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Call <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span> to establish a handler for <tt>SIGALRM</tt>, omitting the <tt>SA_RESTART</tt> flag, so that system calls are not restarted (refer to Section 21.5).</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Call <span class="docEmphasis">alarm()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">setitimer()</span> to establish a timer specifying the upper limit of time for which we wish the system call to block.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Make the blocking system call.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">After the system call returns, call <span class="docEmphasis">alarm()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">setitimer()</span> once more to disable the timer (in case the system call completed before the timer expired).</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Check to see whether the blocking system call failed with <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> set to <tt>EINTR</tt> (interrupted system call).</p></div></li></ol></div><p class="docText">Example 23-2 demonstrates this technique for <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>, using <span class="docEmphasis">alarm()</span> to establish the timer.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EUYBK">Example 23-2. Performing a <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> with timeout</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>timers/timed_read.c</b>
#include &lt;signal.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

#define BUF_SIZE 200

static void     /* SIGALRM handler: interrupts blocked system call */
handler(int sig)
{
    printf("Caught signal\n");          /* UNSAFE (see Section 21.1.2) */
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    struct sigaction sa;
    char buf[BUF_SIZE];
    ssize_t numRead;
    int savedErrno;

    if (argc &gt; 1 &amp;&amp; strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s [num-secs [restart-flag]]\n", argv[0]);

    /* Set up handler for SIGALRM. Allow system calls to be interrupted,
       unless second command-line argument was supplied. */

    sa.sa_flags = (argc &gt; 2) ? SA_RESTART : 0;
    sigemptyset(&amp;sa.sa_mask);
    sa.sa_handler = handler;
    if (sigaction(SIGALRM, &amp;sa, NULL) == -1)
        errExit("sigaction");

    alarm((argc &gt; 1) ? getInt(argv[1], GN_NONNEG, "num-secs") : 10);

    numRead = read(STDIN_FILENO, buf, BUF_SIZE - 1);

    savedErrno = errno;                 /* In case alarm() changes it */
    alarm(0);                           /* Ensure timer is turned off */
    errno = savedErrno;

    /* Determine result of read() */

    if (numRead == -1) {
        if (errno == EINTR)
            printf("Read timed out\n");
        else
            errMsg("read");
    } else {
        printf("Successful read (%ld bytes): %.*s",
                (long) numRead, (int) numRead, buf);
    }

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>timers/timed_read.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">Note that there is a theoretical race condition in the program in Example 23-2. If the timer expires after the call to <span class="docEmphasis">alarm()</span>, but before the <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> call is started, then the <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>
 call won’t be interrupted by the signal handler. Since the timeout 
value used in scenarios like this is normally relatively large (at least
 several seconds) this is highly unlikely to occur, so that, in 
practice, this is a viable technique. [Stevens &amp; Rago, 2005] 
proposes an alternative technique using <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span>. A further alternative when dealing with I/O system calls is to use the timeout feature of the <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> system calls (Chapter 63), which also have the advantage of allowing us to simultaneously wait for I/O on multiple descriptors.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
