<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>23.4. Suspending Execution for a Fixed Interval (Sleeping)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">23.4. Suspending Execution for a Fixed Interval (Sleeping)</h3><p class="docText">Sometimes,
 we want to suspend execution of a process for a fixed amount of time. 
While it is possible to do this using a combination of <span class="docEmphasis">sigsuspend()</span> and the timer functions already described, it is easier to use one of the sleep functions instead.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6WBK">23.4.1. Low-Resolution Sleeping: <span class="docEmphasis">sleep()</span></h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sleep()</span> function suspends execution of the calling process for the number of seconds specified in the <span class="docEmphasis">seconds</span> argument or until a signal is caught (thus interrupting the call).</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

unsigned int <b>sleep</b>(unsigned int <span class="docEmphasis">seconds</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on normal completion, or number of unslept seconds if prematurely terminated</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If the sleep completes, <span class="docEmphasis">sleep()</span> returns 0. If the sleep is interrupted by a signal, <span class="docEmphasis">sleep()</span> returns the number of remaining (unslept) seconds. As with timers set by <span class="docEmphasis">alarm()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">setitimer()</span>, system load may mean that the process is rescheduled only at some (normally short) time after the completion of the <span class="docEmphasis">sleep()</span> call.</p><p class="docText">SUSv3 leaves possible interactions of <span class="docEmphasis">sleep()</span> with <span class="docEmphasis">alarm()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">setitimer()</span> unspecified. On Linux, <span class="docEmphasis">sleep()</span> is implemented as a call to <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span> (Section 23.4.2), with the consequence that there is no interaction between <span class="docEmphasis">sleep()</span> and the timer functions. However, on many implementations, especially older ones, <span class="docEmphasis">sleep()</span> is implemented using <span class="docEmphasis">alarm()</span> and a handler for the <tt>SIGALRM</tt> signal. For portability, we should avoid mixing the use of <span class="docEmphasis">sleep()</span> with <span class="docEmphasis">alarm()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">setitimer()</span>.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5ZBK">23.4.2. High-Resolution Sleeping: <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span></h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span> function performs a similar task to <span class="docEmphasis">sleep()</span>, but provides a number of advantages, including finer resolution when specifying the sleep interval.</p><pre>#define _POSIX_C_SOURCE 199309
#include &lt;time.h&gt;

int <b>nanosleep</b>(const struct timespec *<span class="docEmphasis">request</span>, struct timespec *<span class="docEmphasis">remain</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on successfully completed sleep, or -1 on error or interrupted sleep</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">request</span> argument specifies the duration of the sleep interval and is a pointer to a structure of the following form:</p><pre>struct timespec {
    time_t tv_sec;         /* Seconds */
    long   tv_nsec;        /* Nanoseconds */
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">tv_nsec</span> field specifies a nanoseconds value. It must be a number in the range 0 to 999,999,999.</p><p class="docText">A further advantage of <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span> is that SUSv3 explicitly specifies that it should not be implemented using signals. This means that, unlike the situation with <span class="docEmphasis">sleep()</span>, we can portably mix calls to <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span> with calls to <span class="docEmphasis">alarm()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">setitimer()</span>.</p><p class="docText">Although it is not implemented using signals, <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span> may still be interrupted by a signal handler. In this case, <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span> returns -1, with <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> set to the usual <tt>EINTR</tt> and, if the argument <span class="docEmphasis">remain</span> is not <tt>NULL</tt>,
 the buffer it points to returns the remaining unslept time. If desired,
 we can use the returned value to restart the system call and complete 
the sleep. This is demonstrated in Example 23-3. As command-line arguments, this program expects seconds and nanosecond values for <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span>. The program loops repeatedly, executing <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span> until the total sleep interval is passed. If <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span> is interrupted by the handler for <tt>SIGINT</tt> (generated by typing <span class="docEmphasis">Control-C</span>), then the call is restarted using the value returned in <span class="docEmphasis">remain</span>. When we run this program, we see the following:</p><pre>$ <b>./t_nanosleep 10 0 </b>                      <i> Sleep for 10 seconds</i>
<i> Type Control-C</i>
Slept for:  1.853428 secs
Remaining:  8.146617000
<i> Type Control-C</i>
Slept for:  4.370860 secs
Remaining:  5.629800000
<i> Type Control-C</i>
Slept for:  6.193325 secs
Remaining:  3.807758000
Slept for: 10.008150 secs
Sleep complete</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Although <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span>
 allows nanosecond precision when specifying the sleep interval, the 
accuracy of the sleep interval is limited to the granularity of the 
software clock (Section 10.6). If we specify an interval that is not a multiple of the software clock, then the interval is rounded up.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">As
 noted earlier, on systems that support high-resolution timers, the 
accuracy of the sleep interval can be much finer than the granularity of
 the software clock.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">This
 rounding behavior means that if signals are received at a high rate, 
then there is a problem with the approach employed in the program in Example 23-3. The problem is that each restart of <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span> will be subject to rounding errors, since the returned <span class="docEmphasis">remain</span> time is unlikely to be an exact multiple of the granularity of the software clock. Consequently, each restarted <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span> will sleep longer than the value returned in <span class="docEmphasis">remain</span>
 by the previous call. In the case of an extremely high rate of signal 
delivery (i.e., as or more frequent than the software clock 
granularity), the process may never be able to complete its sleep. On 
Linux 2.6, this problem can be avoided by making use of <span class="docEmphasis">clock_nanosleep()</span> with the <tt>TIMER_ABSTIME</tt> option. We describe <span class="docEmphasis">clock_nanosleep()</span> in Section 23.5.4.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In Linux 2.4 and earlier, there is an eccentricity in the implementation of <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span>. Suppose that a process performing a <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span> call is stopped by a signal. When the process is later resumed via delivery of <tt>SIGCONT</tt>, then the <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span> call fails with the error <tt>EINTR</tt>, as expected. However, if the program subsequently restarts the <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span> call, then the time that the process has spent in the stopped state is <span class="docEmphasis">not</span>
 counted against the sleep interval, so that the process will sleep 
longer than expected. This eccentricity is eliminated in Linux 2.6, 
where the <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span> call automatically resumes on delivery of the <tt>SIGCONT</tt> signal, and the time spent in the sleep state is counted against the sleep interval.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ESBCK">Example 23-3. Using <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>timers/t_nanosleep.c</b>
#define _POSIX_C_SOURCE 199309
#include &lt;sys/time.h&gt;
#include &lt;time.h&gt;
#include &lt;signal.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

static void
sigintHandler(int sig)
{
    return;                     /* Just interrupt nanosleep() */
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    struct timeval start, finish;
    struct timespec request, remain;
    struct sigaction sa;
    int s;

    if (argc != 3 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s secs nanosecs\n", argv[0]);

    request.tv_sec = getLong(argv[1], 0, "secs");
    request.tv_nsec = getLong(argv[2], 0, "nanosecs");

    /* Allow SIGINT handler to interrupt nanosleep() */

    sigemptyset(&amp;sa.sa_mask);
    sa.sa_flags = 0;
    sa.sa_handler = sigintHandler;
    if (sigaction(SIGINT, &amp;sa, NULL) == -1)
        errExit("sigaction");

    if (gettimeofday(&amp;start, NULL) == -1)
        errExit("gettimeofday");

    for (;;) {
        s = nanosleep(&amp;request, &amp;remain);
        if (s == -1 &amp;&amp; errno != EINTR)
            errExit("nanosleep");

        if (gettimeofday(&amp;finish, NULL) == -1)
            errExit("gettimeofday");
        printf("Slept for: %9.6f secs\n", finish.tv_sec - start.tv_sec +
                        (finish.tv_usec - start.tv_usec) / 1000000.0);

        if (s == 0)
            break;                      /* nanosleep() completed */

        printf("Remaining: %2ld.%09ld\n", (long) remain.tv_sec,
                remain.tv_nsec);
        request = remain;               /* Next sleep is with remaining time */
    }

    printf("Sleep complete\n");
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
      <b>timers/t_nanosleep.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
