<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>23.5. POSIX Clocks</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">23.5. POSIX Clocks</h3><p class="docText">POSIX
 clocks (originally defined in POSIX.1b) provide an API for accessing 
clocks that measure time with nanosecond precision. Nanosecond time 
values are represented using the same <span class="docEmphasis">timespec</span> structure as is used by <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span> (Section 23.4.2).</p><p class="docText">On Linux, programs using this API must be compiled with the <span class="docEmphasis">-lrt</span> option, in order to link against the <span class="docEmphasis">librt</span> (realtime) library.</p><p class="docText">The main system calls in the POSIX clocks API are <span class="docEmphasis">clock_gettime()</span>, which retrieves the current value of a clock; <span class="docEmphasis">clock_getres()</span>, which returns the resolution of a clock; and <span class="docEmphasis">clock_settime()</span>, which updates a clock.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EY1BK">23.5.1. Retrieving the Value of a Clock: <span class="docEmphasis">clock_gettime()</span></h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">clock_gettime()</span> system call returns the time according to the clock specified in <span class="docEmphasis">clockid</span>.</p><pre>#define _POSIX_C_SOURCE 199309
#include &lt;time.h&gt;

int <b>clock_gettime</b>(clockid_t <span class="docEmphasis">clockid</span>, struct timespec *<span class="docEmphasis">tp</span>);
int <b>clock_getres</b>(clockid_t <span class="docEmphasis">clockid</span>, struct timespec *<span class="docEmphasis">res</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Both return 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The time value is returned in the timespec structure pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">tp</span>. Although the <span class="docEmphasis">timespec</span> structure affords nanosecond precision, the granularity of the time value returned by <span class="docEmphasis">clock_gettime()</span> may be coarser than this. The <span class="docEmphasis">clock_getres()</span> system call returns a pointer to a <span class="docEmphasis">timespec</span> structure containing the resolution of the clock specified in <span class="docEmphasis">clockid</span>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">clockid_t</span> data type is a type specified by SUSv3 for representing a clock identifier. The first column of Table 23-1 lists the values that can be specified for <span class="docEmphasis">clockid</span></p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 23-1. POSIX.1b clock types</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Clock ID</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>CLOCK_REALTIME</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Settable system-wide real-time clock</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>CLOCK_MONOTONIC</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Nonsettable monotonic clock</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>CLOCK_PROCESS_CPUTIME_ID</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Per-process CPU-time clock (since Linux 2.6.12)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>CLOCK_THREAD_CPUTIME_ID</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Per-thread CPU-time clock (since Linux 2.6.12)</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">The <tt>CLOCK_REALTIME</tt> clock is a system-wide clock that measures wall-clock time. By contrast with the <tt>CLOCK_MONOTONIC</tt> clock, the setting of this clock can be changed.</p><p class="docText">SUSv3 specifies that the <tt>CLOCK_MONOTONIC</tt>
 clock measures time since some “unspecified point in the past” that 
doesn’t change after system startup. This clock is useful for 
applications that must not be affected by discontinuous changes to the 
system clock (e.g., a manual change to the system time). On Linux, this 
clock measures the time since system startup.</p><p class="docText"><tt>The CLOCK_PROCESS_CPUTIME_ID</tt> clock measures the user and system CPU time consumed by the calling process. The <tt>CLOCK_THREAD_CPUTIME_ID</tt> clock performs the analogous task for an individual thread within a process.</p><p class="docText">All of the clocks in Table 23-1 are specified in SUSv3, but only <tt>CLOCK_REALTIME</tt> is mandatory and widely supported on UNIX implementations.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Linux 2.6.28 adds a new clock type, <tt>CLOCK_MONOTONIC_RAW</tt>, to those listed in Table 23-1. This is a nonsettable clock that is similar to <tt>CLOCK_MONOTONIC</tt>,
 but it gives access to a pure hardware-based time that is unaffected by
 NTP adjustments. This nonstandard clock is intended for use in 
specialized clock-synchronization applications.</p><p class="docText">Linux 2.6.32 adds two more new clocks to those listed in Table 23-1: <tt>CLOCK_REALTIME_COARSE</tt> and <tt>CLOCK_MONOTIC_COARSE</tt>. These clocks are similar to <tt>CLOCK_REALTIME</tt> and <tt>CLOCK_MONOTONIC</tt>,
 but intended for applications that want to obtain lower-resolution 
timestamps at minimal cost. These nonstandard clocks don’t cause any 
access to the hardware clock (which can be expensive for some hardware 
clock sources), and the resolution of the returned value is the jiffy (Section 10.6).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4ACK">23.5.2. Setting the Value of a Clock: <span class="docEmphasis">clock_settime()</span></h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">clock_settime()</span> system call sets the clock specified by <span class="docEmphasis">clockid</span> to the time supplied in the buffer pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">tp</span>.</p><pre>#define _POSIX_C_SOURCE 199309
#include &lt;time.h&gt;int <b>clock_settime </b>(clockid_t <i> clockid</i>,
 const struct timespec *<i> tp</i>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If the time specified by <span class="docEmphasis">tp</span> is not a multiple of the clock resolution as returned by <span class="docEmphasis">clock_getres()</span>, the time is rounded downward.</p><p class="docText">A privileged (<tt>CAP_SYS_TIME</tt>) process may set the <tt>CLOCK_REALTIME</tt> clock. The initial value of this clock is typically the time since the Epoch. None of the other clocks in Table 23-1 are modifiable.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">According to SUSv3, an implementation may allow the <tt>CLOCK_PROCESS_CPUTIME_ID</tt> and <tt>CLOCK_THREAD_CPUTIME_ID</tt> clocks to be settable. At the time of writing, these clocks are read-only on Linux.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EMFCK">23.5.3. Obtaining the Clock ID of a Specific Process or Thread</h4><p class="docText">The
 functions described in this section allow us to obtain the ID of a 
clock that measures the CPU time consumed by a particular process or 
thread. We can use the returned clock ID in a call to <span class="docEmphasis">clock_gettime()</span> in order to find out the CPU time consumed by the process or thread.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">clock_getcpuclockid()</span> function returns the identifier of the CPU-time clock of the process whose ID is <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>, in the buffer pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">clockid</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;time.h&gt;

int <b>clock_getcpuclockid</b>(pid_t <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>, clockid_t *<span class="docEmphasis">clockid</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or a positive error number on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> is 0, <span class="docEmphasis">clock_getcpuclockid()</span> returns the ID of the CPU-time clock of the calling process.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_getcpuclockid()</span> function is the POSIX threads analog of the <span class="docEmphasis">clock_getcpuclockid()</span> function. It returns the identifier of the clock measuring the CPU time consumed by a specific thread of the calling process.</p><pre>#include &lt;pthread.h&gt;
#include &lt;time.h&gt;

int <b>pthread_getcpuclockid</b>(pthread_t <span class="docEmphasis">thread</span>, clockid_t *<span class="docEmphasis">clockid</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or a positive error number on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">thread</span>
 argument is a POSIX thread ID that identifies the thread whose CPU-time
 clock ID we want to obtain. The clock ID is returned in the buffer 
pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">clockid</span>.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENJCK">23.5.4. Improved High-Resolution Sleeping: <span class="docEmphasis">clock_nanosleep()</span></h4><p class="docText">Like <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span>, the Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">clock_nanosleep()</span>
 system call suspends the calling process until either a specified 
interval of time has passed or a signal arrives. In this section, we 
describe the features that distinguish <span class="docEmphasis">clock_nanosleep()</span> from <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;time.h&gt;

int <b>clock_nanosleep</b>(clockid_t <span class="docEmphasis">clockid</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">int flags</span>,
       const struct timespec *<span class="docEmphasis">request</span>, struct timespec *<span class="docEmphasis">remain</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on successfully completed sleep, or a positive error number on error or interrupted sleep</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">request</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">remain</span> arguments serve similar purposes to the analogous arguments for <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span>.</p><p class="docText">By default (i.e., if <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> is 0), the sleep interval specified in <span class="docEmphasis">request</span> is relative (like <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span>). However, if we specify <tt>TIMER_ABSTIME</tt> in <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> (see the example in Example 23-4), then <span class="docEmphasis">request</span> specifies an absolute time as measured by the clock identified by <span class="docEmphasis">clockid</span>.
 This feature is essential in applications that need to sleep accurately
 until a specific time. If we instead try retrieving the current time, 
calculating the difference until the desired target time, and doing a 
relative sleep, then there is a possibility that the process may be 
preempted in the middle of these steps, and consequently sleep for 
longer than desired.</p><p class="docText">As described in Section 23.4.2,
 this “oversleeping” problem is particularly marked for a process that 
uses a loop to restart a sleep that is interrupted by a signal handler. 
If signals are delivered at a high rate, then a relative sleep (of the 
type performed by <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span>)
 can lead to large inaccuracies in the time a process spends sleeping. 
We can avoid the oversleeping problem by making an initial call to <span class="docEmphasis">clock_gettime()</span> to retrieve the time, adding the desired amount to that time, and then calling <span class="docEmphasis">clock_nanosleep()</span> with the <tt>TIMER_ABSTIME</tt> flag (and restarting the system call if it is interrupted by a signal handler).</p><p class="docText">When the <tt>TIMER_ABSTIME</tt> flag is specified, the <span class="docEmphasis">remain</span> argument is unused (it is unnecessary). If the <span class="docEmphasis">clock_nanosleep()</span> call is interrupted by a signal handler, then the sleep can be restarted by repeating the call with the same <span class="docEmphasis">request</span> argument.</p><p class="docText">Another feature that distinguishes <span class="docEmphasis">clock_nanosleep()</span> from <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span> is that we can choose the clock that is used to measure the sleep interval. We specify the desired clock in <span class="docEmphasis">clockid</span>: <tt>CLOCK_REALTIME</tt>, <tt>CLOCK_MONOTONIC</tt>, or <tt>CLOCK_PROCESS_CPUTIME_ID</tt>. See Table 23-1 for a description of these clocks.</p><p class="docText">Example 23-4 demonstrates the use of <span class="docEmphasis">clock_nanosleep()</span> to sleep for 20 seconds against the <tt>CLOCK_REALTIME</tt> clock using an absolute time value.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E3OCK">Example 23-4. Using <span class="docEmphasis">clock_nanosleep()</span></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre>struct timespec request;

    /* Retrieve current value of CLOCK_REALTIME clock */

    if (clock_gettime(CLOCK_REALTIME, &amp;request) == -1)
        errExit("clock_gettime");

    request.tv_sec += 20;               /* Sleep for 20 seconds from now */

    s = clock_nanosleep(CLOCK_REALTIME, TIMER_ABSTIME, &amp;request, NULL);
    if (s != 0) {
        if (s == EINTR)
            printf("Interrupted by signal handler\n");
        else
            errExitEN(s, "clock_nanosleep");
    }</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
