<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>23.8. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">23.8. Summary</h3><p class="docText">A process can use <span class="docEmphasis">setitimer()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">alarm()</span>
 to set a timer, so that it receives a signal after the passage of a 
specified amount of real or process time. One use of timers is to set an
 upper limit on the time for which a system call can block.</p><p class="docText">Applications
 that need to suspend execution for a specified interval of real time 
can use a variety of sleep functions for this purpose.</p><p class="docText">Linux
 2.6 implements the POSIX.1b extensions that define an API for 
high-precision clocks and timers. POSIX.1b timers provide a number of 
advantages over traditional (<span class="docEmphasis">setitimer()</span>)
 UNIX timers. We can: create multiple timers; choose the signal that is 
delivered on timer expiration; retrieve the timer overrun count in order
 to determine if a timer has expired multiple times since the last 
expiration notification; and choose to receive timer notifications via 
execution of a thread function instead of delivery of a signal.</p><p class="docText">The Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">timerfd</span>
 API provides a set of interfaces for creating timers that is similar to
 the POSIX timers API, but allows timer notifications to be read via a 
file descriptor. This file descriptor can be monitored using <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWBCK">23.8.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E1BCK">23.8.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">Under
 the rationale for individual functions, SUSv3 provides useful notes on 
the (standard) timer and sleep interface described in this chapter. 
[Gallmeister, 1995] discusses POSIX.1b clocks and timers.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
