<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>24.3. The vfork() System Call</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">24.3. The <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> System Call</h3><p class="docText">Early BSD implementations were among those in which <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> performed a literal duplication of the parent’s data, heap, and stack. As noted earlier, this is wasteful, especially if the <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> is followed by an immediate <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>. For this reason, later versions of BSD introduced the <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> system call, which was far more efficient than BSD’s <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>,
 although it operated with slightly different (in fact, somewhat 
strange) semantics. Modern UNIX implementations employing copy-on-write 
for implementing <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> are much more efficient than older <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> implementations, thus largely eliminating the need for <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span>. Nevertheless, Linux (like many other UNIX implementations) provides a <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> system call with BSD semantics for programs that require the fastest possible fork. However, because the unusual semantics of <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span>
 can lead to some subtle program bugs, its use should normally be 
avoided, except in the rare cases where it provides worthwhile 
performance gains.</p><p class="docText">Like <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> is used by the calling process to create a new child process. However, <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> is expressly designed to be used in programs where the child performs an immediate <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> call.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;
pid_t <b>vfork</b>(void);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In parent: returns process ID of child on success, or -1 on error; in successfully created child: always returns 0</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Two features distinguish the <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> system call from <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> and make it more efficient:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">No
 duplication of virtual memory pages or page tables is done for the 
child process. Instead, the child shares the parent’s memory until it 
either performs a successful <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> or calls <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span> to terminate.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Execution of the parent process is suspended until the child has performed an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span>.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">These
 points have some important implications. Since the child is using the 
parent’s memory, any changes made by the child to the data, heap, or 
stack segments will be visible to the parent once it resumes. 
Furthermore, if the child performs a function return between the <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> and a later <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span>, this will also affect the parent. This is similar to the example described in Section 6.8 of trying to <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> into a function from which a return has already been performed. Similar chaos—typically a segmentation fault (<tt>SIGSEGV</tt>)—is likely to result.</p><p class="docText">There are a few things that the child process can do between <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> without affecting the parent. Among these are operations on open file descriptors (but not <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> file streams). Since the file descriptor table for each process is maintained in kernel space (Section 5.4) and is duplicated during <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span>, the child process can perform file descriptor operations without affecting the parent.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">SUSv3 says that the behavior of a program is undefined if it: a) modifies any data other than a variable of type <span class="docEmphasis">pid_t</span> used to store the return value of <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span>; b) returns from the function in which <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> was called; or c) calls any other function before successfully calling <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span> or performing an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>.</p><p class="docText">When we look at the <span class="docEmphasis">clone()</span> system call in Section 28.2, we’ll see that a child created using <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> also obtains its own copies of a few other process attributes.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The semantics of <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> mean that after the call, the child is guaranteed to be scheduled for the CPU before the parent. In Section 24.2, we noted that this is not a guarantee made by <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, after which either the parent or the child may be scheduled first.</p><p class="docText">Example 24-4 shows the use of <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span>, demonstrating both of the semantic features that distinguish it from <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>: the child shares the parent’s memory, and the parent is suspended until the child terminates or calls <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>. When we run this program, we see the following output:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>./t_vfork </b>
Child executing           <i> Even though child slept, parent was not scheduled</i>
Parent executing
istack=666

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">From the last line of output, we can see that the change made by the child to the variable <span class="docEmphasis">istack</span> was performed on the parent’s variable.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EINCK">Example 24-4. Using <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>procexec/t_vfork.c</b>
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int istack = 222;

    switch (vfork()) {
    case -1:
        errExit("vfork");

    case 0:             /* Child executes first, in parent's memory space */
        sleep(3);                   /* Even if we sleep for a while,
                                       parent still is not scheduled */
        write(STDOUT_FILENO, "Child executing\n", 16);
        istack *= 3;                /* This change will be seen by parent */
        _exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);

    default:            /* Parent is blocked until child exits */
        write(STDOUT_FILENO, "Parent executing\n", 17);
        printf("istack=%d\n", istack);
        exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
    }
}
      <b>procexec/t_vfork.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">Except where speed is absolutely critical, new programs should avoid the use of <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> in favor of <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>. This is because, when <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> is implemented using copy-on-write semantics (as is done on most modern UNIX implementations), it approaches the speed of <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span>, and we avoid the eccentric behaviors associated with <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> described above. (We show some speed comparisons between <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> in Section 28.3.)</p><p class="docText">SUSv3 marks <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> as obsolete, and SUSv4 goes further, removing the specification of <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span>. SUSv3 leaves many details of the operation of <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> unspecified, allowing the possibility that it is implemented as a call to <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>. When implemented in this manner, the BSD semantics for <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> are not preserved. Some UNIX systems do indeed implement <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> as a call to <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, and Linux also did this in kernel 2.0 and earlier.</p><p class="docText">Where it is used, <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> should generally be immediately followed by a call to <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>. If the <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> call fails, the child process should terminate using <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span>. (The child of a <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> should not terminate by calling <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>, since that would cause the parent’s <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffers to be flushed and closed. We go into more detail on this point in Section 25.4.)</p><p class="docText">Other uses of <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span>—in
 particular, those relying on its unusual semantics for memory sharing 
and process scheduling—are likely to render a program nonportable, 
especially to implementations where <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> is implemented simply as a call to <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
