<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>24.4. Race Conditions After fork()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">24.4. Race Conditions After <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span></h3><p class="docText">After a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>,
 it is indeterminate which process—the parent or the child—next has 
access to the CPU. (On a multiprocessor system, they may both 
simultaneously get access to a CPU.) Applications that implicitly or 
explicitly rely on a particular sequence of execution in order to 
achieve correct results are open to failure due to <span class="docEmphasis">race conditions</span>,
 which we described in Section 5.1. Such bugs can be hard to find, as 
their occurrence depends on scheduling decisions that the kernel makes 
according to system load.</p><p class="docText">We can use the program in Example 24-5 to demonstrate this indeterminacy. This program loops, using <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> to create multiple children. After each <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>,
 both parent and child print a message containing the loop counter value
 and a string indicating whether the process is the parent or child. For
 example, if we asked the program to produce just one child, we might 
see the following:</p><pre>$ <b>./fork_whos_on_first 1</b>
0 parent
0 child</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We can use this program to 
create a large number of children, and then analyze the output to see 
whether the parent or the child is the first to print its message each 
time. Analyzing the results when using this program to create 1 million 
children on a Linux/x86-32 2.2.19 system showed that the parent printed 
its message first in all but 332 cases (i.e., in 99.97% of the cases).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The results from running the program in Example 24-5 were analyzed using the script <tt>procexec/fork_whos_on_first.count.awk</tt>, which is provided in the source code distribution for this book.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">From these results, we may surmise that, on Linux 2.2.19, execution always continues with the parent process after a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>.
 The reason that the child occasionally printed its message first was 
that, in 0.03% of cases, the parent’s CPU time slice ran out before it 
had time to print its message. In other words, if this example 
represented a case where we were relying on the parent to always be 
scheduled first after <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>,
 then things would usually go right, but one time out of every 3000, 
things would go wrong. Of course, if the application expected that the 
parent should be able to carry out a larger piece of work before the 
child was scheduled, the possibility of things going wrong would be 
greater. Trying to debug such errors in a complex program can be 
difficult.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EGKCK">Example 24-5. Parent and child race to write a message after <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>procexec/fork_whos_on_first.c</b>
#include &lt;sys/wait.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int numChildren, j;
    pid_t childPid;

    if (argc &gt; 1 &amp;&amp; strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s [num-children]\n", argv[0]);

    numChildren = (argc &gt; 1) ? getInt(argv[1], GN_GT_0, "num-children") : 1;

    setbuf(stdout, NULL);                /* Make stdout unbuffered */

    for (j = 0; j &lt; numChildren; j++) {
        switch (childPid = fork()) {
        case -1:
            errExit("fork");

        case 0:
            printf("%d child\n", j);
            _exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);

        default:
            printf("%d parent\n", j);
            wait(NULL);                   /* Wait for child to terminate */
            break;
        }
    }

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>procexec/fork_whos_on_first.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">Although Linux 2.2.19 always continues execution with the parent after a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>,
 we can’t rely on this being the case on other UNIX implementations, or 
even across different versions of the Linux kernel. During the 2.4 
stable kernel series, experiments were briefly made with a “child first 
after <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>”
 patch, which completely reverses the results obtained from 2.2.19. 
Although this change was later dropped from the 2.4 kernel series, it 
was subsequently adopted in Linux 2.6. Thus, programs that assume the 
2.2.19 behavior would be broken by the 2.6 kernel.</p><p class="docText">Some
 more recent experiments reversed the kernel developers’ assessment of 
whether it was better to run the child or the parent first after <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, and, since Linux 2.6.32, it is once more the parent that is, by default, run first after a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>. This default can be changed by assigning a nonzero value to the Linux-specific /<tt>proc/sys/kernel/sched_child_runs_first</tt> file.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">To see the argument for the “children first after <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>” behavior, consider what happens with copy-on-write semantics when the child of a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> performs an immediate <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>. In this case, as the parent carries on after the <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> to modify data and stack pages, the kernel duplicates the to-be-modified pages for the child. Since the child performs an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>
 as soon as it is scheduled to run, this duplication is wasted. 
According to this argument, it is better to schedule the child first, so
 that by the time the parent is next scheduled, no page copying is 
required. Using the program in Example 24-5
 to create 1 million child processes on one busy Linux/x86-32 system 
running kernel 2.6.30 showed that, in 99.98% of cases, the child process
 displayed its message first. (The precise percentage depends on factors
 such as system load.) Testing this program on other UNIX 
implementations showed wide variation in the rules that govern which 
process runs first after <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>.</p><p class="docText">The argument for switching back to “parent first after <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>” in Linux 2.6.32 was based on the observation that, after a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>,
 the parent’s state is already active in the CPU and its 
memory-management information is already cached in the hardware memory 
management unit’s translation look-aside buffer (TLB). Therefore, 
running the parent first should result in better performance. This was 
informally verified by measuring the time required for kernel builds 
under the two behaviors.</p><p class="docText">In
 conclusion, it is worth noting that the performance differences between
 the two behaviors are rather small, and won’t affect most applications.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">From
 the preceding discussion, it is clear that we can’t assume a particular
 order of execution for the parent and child after a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>.
 If we need to guarantee a particular order, we must use some kind of 
synchronization technique. We describe several synchronization 
techniques in later chapters, including semaphores, file locks, and 
sending messages between processes using pipes. One other method, which 
we describe next, is to use signals.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
