<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>25.1. Terminating a Process: _exit() and exit()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">25.1. Terminating a Process: <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span></h3><p class="docText">A process may terminate in two general ways. One of these is <span class="docEmphasis">abnormal</span>
 termination, caused by the delivery of a signal whose default action is
 to terminate the process (with or without a core dump), as described in
 Section 20.1. Alternatively, a process can terminate <span class="docEmphasis">normally</span>, using the <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span> system call.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

void _<b>exit</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">status</span>);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">status</span> argument given to <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span> defines the <span class="docEmphasis">termination status</span> of the process, which is available to the parent of this process when it calls <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span>. Although defined as an <span class="docEmphasis">int</span>, only the bottom 8 bits of <span class="docEmphasis">status</span>
 are actually made available to the parent. By convention, a termination
 status of 0 indicates that a process completed successfully, and a 
nonzero status value indicates that the process terminated 
unsuccessfully. There are no fixed rules about how nonzero status values
 are to be interpreted; different applications follow their own 
conventions, which should be described in their documentation. SUSv3 
specifies two constants, <tt>EXIT_SUCCESS</tt> (0) and <tt>EXIT_FAILURE</tt> (1), that are used in most programs in this book.</p><p class="docText">A process is always successfully terminated by <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span> (i.e., <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span> never returns).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Although any value in the range 0 to 255 can be passed to the parent via the <span class="docEmphasis">status</span> argument to <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span>,
 specifying values greater than 128 can cause confusion in shell 
scripts. The reason is that, when a command is terminated by a signal, 
the shell indicates this fact by setting the value of the variable <span class="docEmphasis">$?</span> to 128 plus the signal number, and this value is indistinguishable from that yielded when a process calls <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span> with the same <span class="docEmphasis">status</span> value.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Programs generally don’t call <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span> directly, but instead call the <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span> library function, which performs various actions before calling <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;stdlib.h&gt;

void <b>exit</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">status</span>);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The following actions are performed by <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Exit handlers (functions registered with <span class="docEmphasis">atexit()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">on_exit()</span>) are called, in reverse order of their registration (Section 25.3).</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> stream buffers are flushed.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span> system call is invoked, using the value supplied in <span class="docEmphasis">status</span>.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Unlike <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span>, which is UNIX-specific, <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span> is defined as part of the standard C library; that is, it is available with every C implementation.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">One other way in which a process may terminate is to return from <span class="docEmphasis">main()</span>, either explicitly, or implicitly, by falling off the end of the <span class="docEmphasis">main()</span> function. Performing an explicit <span class="docEmphasis">return n</span> is generally equivalent to calling <span class="docEmphasis">exit(n)</span>, since the run-time function that invokes <span class="docEmphasis">main()</span> uses the return value from <span class="docEmphasis">main()</span> in a call to <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">There is one circumstance in which calling <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span> and returning from <span class="docEmphasis">main()</span> are not equivalent. If any steps performed during exit processing access variables local to <span class="docEmphasis">main()</span>, then doing a <tt>return</tt> from <span class="docEmphasis">main()</span> results in undefined behavior. For example, this could occur if a variable that is local to <span class="docEmphasis">main()</span> is specified in a call to <span class="docEmphasis">setvbuf()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">setbuf()</span> (Section 13.2).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Performing a return without specifying a value, or falling off the end of the <span class="docEmphasis">main()</span> function, also results in the caller of <span class="docEmphasis">main()</span> invoking <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>, but with results that vary depending on the version of the C standard supported and the compilation options employed:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">In C89, the behavior in these circumstances is undefined; the program can terminate with an arbitrary <span class="docEmphasis">status</span> value. This is the behavior that occurs by default with <span class="docEmphasis">gcc</span>
 on Linux, where the exit status of the program is taken from some 
random value lying on the stack or in a particular CPU register. 
Terminating a program in this way should be avoided.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The C99 standard requires that falling off the end of the main program should be equivalent to calling <span class="docEmphasis">exit(0)</span>. This is the behavior we obtain on Linux if we compile a program using <span class="docEmphasis">gcc -std=c99</span>.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
