<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>25.2. Details of Process Termination</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">25.2. Details of Process Termination</h3><p class="docText">During both normal and abnormal termination of a process, the following actions occur:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Open file descriptors, directory streams (Section 18.8), message catalog descriptors (see the <span class="docEmphasis">catopen(3)</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">catgets(3)</span> manual pages), and conversion descriptors (see the <span class="docEmphasis">iconv_open(3)</span> manual page) are closed.</p></li><li><p class="docList">As a consequence of closing file descriptors, any file locks (Chapter 55) held by this process are released.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Any attached System V shared memory segments are detached, and the <span class="docEmphasis">shm_nattch</span> counter corresponding to each segment is decremented by one. (Refer to Section 48.8.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">For each System V semaphore for which a <span class="docEmphasis">semadj</span> value has been set by the process, that <span class="docEmphasis">semadj</span> value is added to the semaphore value. (Refer to Section 47.8.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">If this is the controlling process for a controlling terminal, then the <tt>SIGHUP</tt>
 signal is sent to each process in the controlling terminal’s foreground
 process group, and the terminal is disassociated from the session. We 
consider this point further in Section 34.6.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Any POSIX named semaphores that are open in the calling process are closed as though <span class="docEmphasis">sem_close()</span> were called.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Any POSIX message queues that are open in the calling process are closed as though <span class="docEmphasis">mq_close()</span> were called.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If,
 as a consequence of this process exiting, a process group becomes 
orphaned and there are any stopped processes in that group, then all 
processes in the group are sent a <tt>SIGHUP</tt> signal followed by a <tt>SIGCONT</tt> signal. We consider this point further in Section 34.7.4.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Any memory locks established by this process using <span class="docEmphasis">mlock()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">mlockall()</span> (Section 50.2) are removed.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Any memory mappings established by this process using <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> are unmapped.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
