<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>25.3. Exit Handlers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">25.3. Exit Handlers</h3><p class="docText">Sometimes,
 an application needs to automatically perform some operations on 
process termination. Consider the example of an application library 
that, if used during the life of the process, needs to have some cleanup
 actions performed automatically when the process exits. Since the 
library doesn’t have control of when and how the process exits, and 
can’t mandate that the main program call a library-specific cleanup 
function before exiting, cleanup is not guaranteed to occur. One 
approach in such situations is to use an <span class="docEmphasis">exit handler</span> (older System V manuals used the term <span class="docEmphasis">program termination routine</span>).</p><p class="docText">An
 exit handler is a programmer-supplied function that is registered at 
some point during the life of the process and is then automatically 
called during <span class="docEmphasis">normal</span> process termination via <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>. Exit handlers are not called if a program calls <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span> directly or if the process is terminated abnormally by a signal.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">To
 some extent, the fact that exit handlers are not called when a process 
is terminated by a signal limits their utility. The best we can do is to
 establish handlers for the signals that might be sent to the process, 
and have these handlers set a flag that causes the main program to call <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>. (Because <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span> is not one of the async-signal-safe functions listed in Table 21-1, in Section 21.1.2.4, we generally can’t call it from a signal handler.) Even then, this doesn’t handle the case of <tt>SIGKILL</tt>, whose default action can’t be changed. This is one more reason we should avoid using <tt>SIGKILL</tt> to terminate a process (as noted in Section 20.2), and instead use <tt>SIGTERM</tt>, which is the default signal sent by the <span class="docEmphasis">kill</span> command.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKPCK">25.3.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EOPCK">25.3.1.1. Registering exit handlers</h5><p class="docText">The GNU C library provides two ways of registering exit handlers. The first method, specified in SUSv3, is to use the <span class="docEmphasis">atexit()</span> function.</p><pre>#include &lt;stdlib.h&gt;

int <b>atexit</b>(void (*<span class="docEmphasis">func</span>)(void));</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or nonzero on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">atexit()</span> function adds <span class="docEmphasis">func</span> to a list of functions that are called when the process terminates. The function <span class="docEmphasis">func</span> should be defined to take no arguments and return no value, thus having the following general form:</p><pre>void
func(void)
{
    /* Perform some actions */
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that <span class="docEmphasis">atexit()</span> returns a nonzero value (not necessarily -1) on error.</p><p class="docText">It is possible to register multiple exit handlers (and even the same exit handler multiple times). When the program invokes <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>, these functions are called <span class="docEmphasis">in reverse order</span>
 of registration. This ordering is logical because, typically, functions
 that are registered earlier are those that carry out more fundamental 
types of cleanups that may need to be performed after later-registered 
functions.</p><p class="docText">Essentially, any 
desired action can be performed inside an exit handler, including 
registering additional exit handlers, which are placed at the head of 
the list of exit handlers that remain to be called. However, if one of 
the exit handlers fails to return—either because it called <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span> or because the process was terminated by a signal (e.g., the exit handler called <span class="docEmphasis">raise()</span>)—then the remaining exit handlers are not called. In addition, the remaining actions that would normally be performed by <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span> (i.e., flushing <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffers) are not performed.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">SUSv3 states that if an exit handler itself calls <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>,
 the results are undefined. On Linux, the remaining exit handlers are 
invoked as normal. However, on some systems, this causes all of the exit
 handlers to once more be invoked, which can result in an infinite 
recursion (until a stack overflow kills the process). Portable 
applications should avoid calling <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span> inside an exit handler.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">SUSv3 requires that an implementation allow a process to be able to register at least 32 exit handlers. Using the call <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf(_SC_ATEXIT_MAX)</span>,
 a program can determine the implementation-defined upper limit on the 
number of exit handlers that can be registered. (However, there is no 
way to find out how many exit handlers have already been registered.) By
 chaining the registered exit handlers in a dynamically allocated linked
 list, <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> allows a virtually unlimited number of exit handlers to be registered. On Linux, <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf(_SC_ATEXIT_MAX)</span>
 returns 2,147,482,647 (i.e., the maximum signed 32-bit integer). In 
other words, something else will break (e.g., lack of memory) before we 
reach the limit on the number of functions that can be registered.</p><p class="docText">A child process created via <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> inherits a copy of its parent’s exit handler registrations. When a process performs an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, all exit handler registrations are removed. (This is necessarily so, since an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> replaces the code of the exit handlers along with the rest of the existing program code.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">We can’t deregister an exit handler that has been registered with <span class="docEmphasis">atexit()</span> (or <span class="docEmphasis">on_exit()</span>,
 described below). However, we can have the exit handler check whether a
 global flag is set before it performs its actions, and disable the exit
 handler by clearing the flag.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Exit handlers registered with <span class="docEmphasis">atexit()</span> suffer a couple of limitations. The first is that when called, an exit handler doesn’t know what status was passed to <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>.
 Occasionally, knowing the status could be useful; for example, we may 
like to perform different actions depending on whether the process is 
exiting successfully or unsuccessfully. The second limitation is that we
 can’t specify an argument to the exit handler when it is called. Such a
 facility could be useful to define an exit handler that performs 
different actions depending on its argument, or to register a function 
multiple times, each time with a different argument.</p><p class="docText">To address these limitations, <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> provides a (nonstandard) alternative method of registering exit handlers: <span class="docEmphasis">on_exit()</span>.</p><pre>#define _BSD_SOURCE           /* Or: #define _SVID_SOURCE */
#include &lt;stdlib.h&gt;

int <b>on_exit</b>(void (*<span class="docEmphasis">func</span>)(int, void *), void *<span class="docEmphasis">arg</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or nonzero on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">func</span> argument of <span class="docEmphasis">on_exit()</span> is a pointer to a function of the following type:</p><pre>void
func(int status, void *arg)
{
    /* Perform cleanup actions */
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">When called, <span class="docEmphasis">func()</span> is passed two arguments: the <span class="docEmphasis">status</span> argument supplied to <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>, and a copy of the <span class="docEmphasis">arg</span> argument supplied to <span class="docEmphasis">on_exit()</span> at the time the function was registered. Although defined as a pointer type, <span class="docEmphasis">arg</span>
 is open to programmer-defined interpretation. It could be used as a 
pointer to some structure; equally, through judicious use of casting, it
 could be treated as an integer or other scalar type.</p><p class="docText">Like <span class="docEmphasis">atexit()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">on_exit()</span> returns a nonzero value (not necessarily -1) on error.</p><p class="docText">As with <span class="docEmphasis">atexit()</span>, multiple exit handlers can be registered with <span class="docEmphasis">on_exit()</span>. Functions registered using <span class="docEmphasis">atexit()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">on_exit()</span>
 are placed on the same list. If both methods are used in the same 
program, then the exit handlers are called in reverse order of their 
registration using the two methods.</p><p class="docText">Although more flexible than <span class="docEmphasis">atexit()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">on_exit()</span>
 should be avoided in programs intended to be portable, since it is not 
covered by any standards and is available on few other UNIX 
implementations.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ELVCK">25.3.1.2. Example program</h5><p class="docText">Example 25-1 demonstrates the use of <span class="docEmphasis">atexit()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">on_exit()</span> to register exit handlers. When we run this program, we see the following output:</p><pre>$ <b>./exit_handlers</b>
on_exit function called: status=2, arg=20
atexit function 2 called
atexit function 1 called
on_exit function called: status=2, arg=10</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EFWCK">Example 25-1. Using exit handlers</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>procexec/exit_handlers.c</b>
#define _BSD_SOURCE     /* Get on_exit() declaration from &lt;stdlib.h&gt; */
#include &lt;stdlib.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

static void
atexitFunc1(void)
{
    printf("atexit function 1 called\n");
}

static void
atexitFunc2(void)
{
    printf("atexit function 2 called\n");
}

static void
onexitFunc(int exitStatus, void *arg)
{
    printf("on_exit function called: status=%d, arg=%ld\n",
                exitStatus, (long) arg);
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    if (on_exit(onexitFunc, (void *) 10) != 0)
        fatal("on_exit 1");
    if (atexit(atexitFunc1) != 0)
        fatal("atexit 1");
    if (atexit(atexitFunc2) != 0)
        fatal("atexit 2");
    if (on_exit(onexitFunc, (void *) 20) != 0)
        fatal("on_exit 2");

    exit(2);
}
      <b>procexec/exit_handlers.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
