<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>25.4. Interactions Between fork(), stdio Buffers, and _exit()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">25.4. Interactions Between <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> Buffers, and <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span></h3><p class="docText">The output yielded by the program in Example 25-2
 demonstrates a phenomenon that is at first puzzling. When we run this 
program with standard output directed to the terminal, we see the 
expected result:</p><pre>$ <b>./fork_stdio_buf</b>
Hello world
Ciao</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">However, when we redirect standard output to a file, we see the following:</p><pre>$ <b>./fork_stdio_buf &gt; a</b>
$ <b>cat a</b>
Ciao
Hello world
Hello world</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In the above output, we see two strange things: the line written by <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> appears twice, and the output of <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> precedes that of <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span>.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EURCK">Example 25-2. Interaction of <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffering</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre><b>procexec/fork_stdio_buf.c</b>
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    printf("Hello world\n");
    write(STDOUT_FILENO, "Ciao\n", 5);

    if (fork() == -1)
        errExit("fork");

    /* Both child and parent continue execution here */

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>procexec/fork_stdio_buf.c</b></pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">To understand why the message written with <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> appears twice, recall that the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffers are maintained in a process’s user-space memory (refer to Section 13.2). Therefore, these buffers are duplicated in the child by <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>.
 When standard output is directed to a terminal, it is line-buffered by 
default, with the result that the newline-terminated string written by <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span>
 appears immediately. However, when standard output is directed to a 
file, it is block-buffered by default. Thus, in our example, the string 
written by <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> is still in the parent’s <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffer at the time of the <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, and this string is duplicated in the child. When the parent and the child later call <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>, they both flush their copies of the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffers, resulting in duplicate output.</p><p class="docText">We can prevent this duplicated output from occurring in one of the following ways:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">As a specific solution to the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffering issue, we can use <span class="docEmphasis">fflush()</span> to flush the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffer prior to a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> call. Alternatively, we could use <span class="docEmphasis">setvbuf()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">setbuf()</span> to disable buffering on the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> stream.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Instead of calling <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>, the child can call <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span>, so that it doesn’t flush <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span>
 buffers. This technique exemplifies a more general principle: in an 
application that creates child processes that don’t exec new programs, 
typically only one of the processes (most often the parent) should 
terminate via <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>, while the other processes should terminate via <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span>. This ensures that only one process calls exit handlers and flushes <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffers, which is usually desirable.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Other approaches that allow both the parent and child to call <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>
 are possible (and sometimes necessary). For example, it may be possible
 to design exit handlers so that they operate correctly even if called 
from multiple processes, or to have the application install exit 
handlers only after the call to <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>. Furthermore, sometimes we may actually want all processes to flush their <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffers after a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>. In this case, we may choose to terminate the processes using <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>, or use explicit calls to <span class="docEmphasis">fflush()</span> in each process, as appropriate.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The output of the <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> in the program in Example 25-2 doesn’t appear twice, because <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> transfers data directly to a kernel buffer, and this buffer is not duplicated during a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>.</p><p class="docText">By
 now, the reason for the second strange aspect of the program’s output 
when redirected to a file should be clear. The output of <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> appears before that from <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> because the output of <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> is immediately transferred to the kernel buffer cache, while the output from <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> is transferred only when the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffers are flushed by the call to <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>. (In general, care is required when mixing <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> functions and system calls to perform I/O on the same file, as described in Section 13.7.)</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
