<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>26.2. Orphans and Zombies</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">26.2. Orphans and Zombies</h3><p class="docText">The
 lifetimes of parent and child processes are usually not the same—either
 the parent outlives the child or vice versa. This raises two questions:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Who becomes the parent of an <span class="docEmphasis">orphaned</span> child? The orphaned child is adopted by <span class="docEmphasis">init</span>, the ancestor of all processes, whose process ID is 1. In other words, after a child’s parent terminates, a call to <span class="docEmphasis">getppid()</span>
 will return the value 1. This can be used as a way of determining if a 
child’s true parent is still alive (this assumes a child that was 
created by a process other than <span class="docEmphasis">init</span>).</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Using the <tt>PR_SET_PDEATHSIG</tt> operation of the Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">prctl()</span> system call, it is possible to arrange that a process receives a specified signal when it becomes an orphan.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><ul><li><p class="docList">What happens to a child that terminates before its parent has had a chance to perform a <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span>? The point here is that, although the child has finished its work, the parent should still be permitted to perform a <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span> at some later time to determine how the child terminated. The kernel deals with this situation by turning the child into a <span class="docEmphasis">zombie</span>.
 This means that most of the resources held by the child are released 
back to the system to be reused by other processes. The only part of the
 process that remains is an entry in the kernel’s process table 
recording (among other things) the child’s process ID, termination 
status, and resource usage statistics (Section 36.1).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Regarding zombies, UNIX systems imitate the movies—a zombie process can’t be killed by a signal, not even the (silver bullet) <tt>SIGKILL</tt>. This ensures that the parent can always eventually perform a <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span>.</p><p class="docText">When the parent does perform a <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span>,
 the kernel removes the zombie, since the last remaining information 
about the child is no longer required. On the other hand, if the parent 
terminates without doing a <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span>, then the <span class="docEmphasis">init</span> process adopts the child and automatically performs a <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span>, thus removing the zombie process from the system.</p><p class="docText">If a parent creates a child, but fails to perform a <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span>,
 then an entry for the zombie child will be maintained indefinitely in 
the kernel’s process table. If a large number of such zombie children 
are created, they will eventually fill the kernel process table, 
preventing the creation of new processes. Since the zombies can’t be 
killed by a signal, the only way to remove them from the system is to 
kill their parent (or wait for it to exit), at which time the zombies 
are adopted and waited on by <span class="docEmphasis">init</span>, and consequently removed from the system.</p><p class="docText">These
 semantics have important implications for the design of long-lived 
parent processes, such as network servers and shells, that create 
numerous children. To put things another way, in such applications, a 
parent process should perform <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span>
 calls in order to ensure that dead children are always removed from the
 system, rather than becoming long-lived zombies. The parent may perform
 such <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span> calls either synchronously, or asynchronously, in response to delivery of the <tt>SIGCHLD</tt> signal, as described in Section 26.3.1.</p><p class="docText">Example 26-4 demonstrates the creation of a zombie and that a zombie can’t be killed by <tt>SIGKILL</tt>. When we run this program, we see the following output:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>./make_zombie </b>
Parent PID=1013
Child (PID=1014) exiting
 1013 pts/4    00:00:00 make_zombie                       <i> Output from</i> <b>ps(1) </b>
 1014 pts/4    00:00:00 make_zombie &lt;defunct&gt;
After sending SIGKILL to make_zombie (PID=1014):
 1013 pts/4    00:00:00 make_zombie                       <i> Output from</i> <b>ps(1) </b>
 1014 pts/4    00:00:00 make_zombie &lt;defunct&gt;

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In the above output, we see that <span class="docEmphasis">ps(1)</span> displays the string <tt>&lt;defunct&gt;</tt> to indicate a process in the zombie state.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The program in Example 26-4 uses the <span class="docEmphasis">system()</span> function to execute the shell command given in its character-string argument. We describe <span class="docEmphasis">system()</span> in detail in Section 27.6.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E13CK">Example 26-4. Creating a zombie child process</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>procexec/make_zombie.c</b>
#include &lt;signal.h&gt;
#include &lt;libgen.h&gt;             /* For basename() declaration */
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

#define CMD_SIZE 200

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    char cmd[CMD_SIZE];
    pid_t childPid;

    setbuf(stdout, NULL);       /* Disable buffering of stdout */

    printf("Parent PID=%ld\n", (long) getpid());

    switch (childPid = fork()) {
    case -1:
        errExit("fork");

    case 0:     /* Child: immediately exits to become zombie */
        printf("Child (PID=%ld) exiting\n", (long) getpid());
        _exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);

        default:    /* Parent */
        sleep(3);               /* Give child a chance to start and exit */
        snprintf(cmd, CMD_SIZE, "ps | grep %s", basename(argv[0]));
        cmd[CMD_SIZE - 1] = '\0';       /* Ensure string is null-terminated */
        system(cmd);            /* View zombie child */

        /* Now send the "sure kill" signal to the zombie */

        if (kill(childPid, SIGKILL) == -1)
            errMsg("kill");
        sleep(3);               /* Give child a chance to react to signal */
        printf("After sending SIGKILL to zombie (PID=%ld):\n", (long) childPid);
        system(cmd);            /* View zombie child again */

        exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
    }
}
      <b>procexec/make_zombie.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
