<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>27.1. Executing a New Program: execve()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">27.1. Executing a New Program: <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span></h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span>
 system call loads a new program into a process’s memory. During this 
operation, the old program is discarded, and the process’s stack, data, 
and heap are replaced by those of the new program. After executing 
various C library run-time startup code and program initialization code 
(e.g., C++ static constructors or C functions declared with the <span class="docEmphasis">gcc</span> <tt>constructor</tt> attribute described in Section 42.4), the new program commences execution at its <span class="docEmphasis">main()</span> function.</p><p class="docText">The most frequent use of <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span> is in the child produced by a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, although it is also occasionally used in applications without a preceding <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>.</p><p class="docText">Various library functions, all with names beginning with <span class="docEmphasis">exec</span>, are layered on top of the <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span>
 system call. Each of these functions provides a different interface to 
the same functionality. The loading of a new program by any of these 
calls is commonly referred to as an <span class="docEmphasis">exec</span> operation, or simply by the notation <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>. We begin with a description of <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span> and then describe the library functions.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

int <b>execve</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, char *const <span class="docEmphasis">argv</span>[], char *const <span class="docEmphasis">envp</span>[]);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Never returns on success; returns -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>
 argument contains the pathname of the new program to be loaded into the
 process’s memory. This pathname can be absolute (indicated by an 
initial /) or relative to the current working directory of the calling 
process.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">argv</span>
 argument specifies the command-line arguments to be passed to the new 
program. This array corresponds to, and has the same form as, the second
 (<span class="docEmphasis">argv</span>) argument to a C <span class="docEmphasis">main()</span> function; it is a <tt>NULL</tt>-terminated list of pointers to character strings. The value supplied for <span class="docEmphasis">argv[0]</span> corresponds to the command name. Typically, this value is the same as the basename (i.e., the final component) of <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>.</p><p class="docText">The final argument, <span class="docEmphasis">envp</span>, specifies the environment list for the new program. The <span class="docEmphasis">envp</span> argument corresponds to the <span class="docEmphasis">environ</span> array of the new program; it is a <tt>NULL</tt>-terminated list of pointers to character strings of the form <span class="docEmphasis">name=value</span> (Section 6.7).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The Linux-specific <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/exe</tt> file is a symbolic link containing the absolute pathname of the executable file being run by the corresponding process.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">After an <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span>,
 the process ID of the process remains the same, because the same 
process continues to exist. A few other process attributes also remain 
unchanged, as described in Section 28.4.</p><p class="docText">If the set-user-ID (set-group-ID) permission bit of the program file specified by <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>
 is set, then, when the file is execed, the effective user (group) ID of
 the process is changed to be the same as the owner (group) of the 
program file. This is a mechanism for temporarily granting privileges to
 users while running a specific program (see Section 9.3).</p><p class="docText">After optionally changing the effective IDs, and regardless of whether they were changed, an <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span>
 copies the value of the process’s effective user ID into its saved 
set-user-ID, and copies the value of the process’s effective group ID 
into its saved set-group-ID.</p><p class="docText">Since it replaces the program that called it, a successful <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span> never returns. We never need to check the return value from <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span>; it will always be -1. The very fact that it returned informs us that an error occurred, and, as usual, we can use <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> to determine the cause. Among the errors that may be returned in <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> are the following:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">EACCES</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>
 argument doesn’t refer to a regular file, the file doesn’t have execute
 permission enabled, or one of the directory components of <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>
 is not searchable (i.e., execute permission is denied on the 
directory). Alternatively, the file resides on a file system that was 
mounted with the <tt>MS_NOEXEC</tt> flag (Section 14.8.1).</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">ENOENT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The file referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> doesn’t exist.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">ENOEXEC</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The file referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>
 is marked as being executable, but it is not in a recognizable 
executable format. Possibly, it is a script that doesn’t begin with a 
line (starting with the characters <tt>#!</tt>) specifying a script interpreter.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">ETXTBSY</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The file referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> is open for writing by another process (Section 4.3.2).</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">E2BIG</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The total space required by the argument list and environment list exceeds the allowed maximum.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">The
 errors listed above may also be generated if any of these conditions 
apply to the interpreter file defined to execute a script (refer to Section 27.3) or to the ELF interpreter being used to execute the program.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The
 Executable and Linking Format (ELF) is a widely implemented 
specification describing the layout of executable files. Normally, 
during an exec, a process image is constructed using the segments of the
 executable file (Section 6.3). However, the ELF specification also allows for an executable file to define an interpreter (the <tt>PT_INTERP</tt>
 ELF program header element) to be used to execute the program. If an 
interpreter is defined, the kernel constructs the process image from the
 segments of the specified interpreter executable file. It is then the 
responsibility of the interpreter to load and execute the program. We 
say a little more about the ELF interpreter in Chapter 41 and provide some pointers to further information in that chapter.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E2FDK">27.1.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E6FDK">27.1.1.1. Example program</h5><p class="docText">Example 27-1 demonstrates the use of <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span>. This program creates an argument list and an environment for a new program, and then calls <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span>, using its command-line argument (<span class="docEmphasis">argv[1]</span>) as the pathname to be executed.</p><p class="docText">Example 27-2 shows a program that is designed to be executed by the program in Example 27-1. This program simply displays its command-line arguments and environment list (the latter is accessed using the global <span class="docEmphasis">environ</span> variable, as described in Section 6.7).</p><p class="docText">The following shell session demonstrates the use of the programs in Example 27-1 and Example 27-2 (in this example, a relative pathname is used to specify the program to be execed):</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>./t_execve ./envargs </b>
argv[0] = envargs                   <i> All of the output is printed by</i> <b>envargs </b>
argv[1] = hello world
argv[2] = goodbye
environ: GREET=salut
environ: BYE=adieu

					  </pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EUIDK">Example 27-1. Using <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span> to execute a new program</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre><b>procexec/t_execve.c</b>
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    char *argVec[10];           /* Larger than required */
    char *envVec[] = { "GREET=salut", "BYE=adieu", NULL };

    if (argc != 2 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s pathname\n", argv[0]);

    argVec[0] = strrchr(argv[1], '/');      /* Get basename from argv[1] */
    if (argVec[0] != NULL)
        argVec[0]++;
    else
        argVec[0] = argv[1];
    argVec[1] = "hello world";
    argVec[2] = "goodbye";
    argVec[3] = NULL;           /* List must be NULL-terminated */

    execve(argv[1], argVec, envVec);
    errExit("execve");          /* If we get here, something went wrong */
}

      <b>procexec/t_execve.c</b></pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ECJDK">Example 27-2. Display argument list and environment</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre><b>procexec/envargs.c</b>
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

extern char **environ;

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int j;
    char **ep;

    for (j = 0; j &lt; argc; j++)
        printf("argv[%d] = %s\n", j, argv[j]);

    for (ep = environ; *ep != NULL; ep++)
        printf("environ: %s\n", *ep);

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>procexec/envargs.c</b></pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
