<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>27.2. The exec() Library Functions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">27.2. The <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> Library Functions</h3><p class="docText">The library functions described in this section provide alternative APIs for performing an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>. All of these functions are layered on top of <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span>, and they differ from one another and from <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span> only in the way in which the program name, argument list, and environment of the new program are specified.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

int <b>execle</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">arg</span>, ...
                /* , (char *) NULL, char *const <span class="docEmphasis">envp</span>[] */ );
int <b>execlp</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">filename</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">arg</span>, ...
                /* , (char *) NULL */);
int <b>execvp</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">filename</span>, char *const <span class="docEmphasis">argv</span>[]);
int <b>execv</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, char *const <span class="docEmphasis">argv</span>[]);
int <b>execl</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">arg</span>, ...
                /* , (char *) NULL */);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">None of the above returns on success; all return -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The
 final letters in the names of these functions provide a clue to the 
differences between them. These differences are summarized in Table 27-1 and detailed in the following list:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Most of the <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> functions expect a pathname as the specification of the new program to be loaded. However, <span class="docEmphasis">execlp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">execvp()</span> allow the program to be specified using just a filename. The filename is sought in the list of directories specified in the <tt>PATH</tt>
 environment variable (explained in more detail below). This is the kind
 of searching that the shell performs when given a command name. To 
indicate this difference in operation, the names of these functions 
contain the letter <span class="docEmphasis">p</span> (for <tt>PATH</tt>). The <tt>PATH</tt> variable is not used if the filename contains a slash (<tt>/</tt>), in which case it is treated as a relative or absolute pathname.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Instead of using an array to specify the <span class="docEmphasis">argv</span> list for the new program, <span class="docEmphasis">execle()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">execlp()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">execl()</span>
 require the programmer to specify the arguments as a list of strings 
within the call. The first of these arguments corresponds to <span class="docEmphasis">argv[0]</span> in the <span class="docEmphasis">main</span> function of the new program, and is thus typically the same as the <span class="docEmphasis">filename</span> argument or the basename component of the <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> argument. A <tt>NULL</tt>
 pointer must terminate the argument list, so that these calls can 
locate the end of the list. (This requirement is indicated by the 
commented <span class="docEmphasis">(char *) NULL</span> in the above prototypes; for a discussion of why the cast is required before the <tt>NULL</tt>, see Appendix C.) The names of these functions contain the letter l (for <span class="docEmphasis">list</span>) to distinguish them from those functions requiring the argument list as a <tt>NULL</tt>-terminated array. The names of the functions that require the argument list as an array (<span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">execvp()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">execv()</span>) contain the letter <span class="docEmphasis">v</span> (for vec<span class="docEmphasis">tor</span>).</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">execle()</span> functions allow the programmer to explicitly specify the environment for the new program using <span class="docEmphasis">envp</span>, a <tt>NULL</tt>-terminated array of pointers to character strings. The names of these functions end with the letter <span class="docEmphasis">e</span> (for <span class="docEmphasis">environment</span>) to indicate this fact. All of the other <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> functions use the caller’s existing environment (i.e., the contents of <span class="docEmphasis">environ</span>) as the environment for the new program.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Version 2.11 of <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> added a nonstandard function, <span class="docEmphasis">execvpe(file, argv, envp)</span>. This function is like <span class="docEmphasis">execvp()</span>, but instead of taking the environment for the new program from <span class="docEmphasis">environ</span>, the caller specifies the new environment via the <span class="docEmphasis">envp</span> argument (like <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">execle()</span>).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">In the next few pages, we demonstrate the use of some of these <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> variants.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 27-1. Summary of differences between the <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> functions</h5></caption><colgroup span="4"><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Function</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Specification of program file<span class="docEmphasis">(-, p)</span></th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Specification of arguments<span class="docEmphasis">(v, l)</span></th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Source of environment<span class="docEmphasis">(e, -)</span></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">pathname</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">array</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">envp</span> argument</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">execle()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">pathname</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">list</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">envp</span> argument</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">execlp()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">filename + <tt>PATH</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">list</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">caller’s <span class="docEmphasis">environ</span></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">execvp()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">filename + <tt>PATH</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">array</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">caller’s <span class="docEmphasis">environ</span></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">execv()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">pathname</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">array</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">caller’s <span class="docEmphasis">environ</span></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">execl()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">pathname</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">list</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">caller’s <span class="docEmphasis">environ</span></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECMDK">27.2.1. The <tt>PATH</tt> Environment Variable</h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">execvp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">execlp()</span> functions allow us to specify just the name of the file to be executed. These functions make use of the <tt>PATH</tt> environment variable to search for the file. The value of <tt>PATH</tt> is a string consisting of colon-separated directory names called <span class="docEmphasis">path prefixes</span>. As an example, the following <tt>PATH</tt> value specifies five directories:</p><pre>$ <b>echo $PATH</b>
/home/mtk/bin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/bin:/bin:.</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>PATH</tt> value 
for a login shell is set by system-wide and user-specific shell startup 
scripts. Since a child process inherits a copy of its parent’s 
environment variables, each process that the shell creates to execute a 
command inherits a copy of the shell’s <tt>PATH</tt>.</p><p class="docText">The directory pathnames specified in <tt>PATH</tt> can be either absolute (commencing with an initial <tt>/</tt>)
 or relative. A relative pathname is interpreted with respect to the 
current working directory of the calling process. The current working 
directory can be specified using <tt>.</tt> (dot), as in the above example.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">It is also possible to specify the current working directory by including a zero-length prefix in <tt>PATH</tt>, by employing consecutive colons, an initial colon, or a trailing colon (e.g., <tt>/usr/bin:/bin:</tt>). SUSv3 declares this technique obsolete; the current working directory should be explicitly specified using <tt>.</tt> (dot).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If the <tt>PATH</tt> variable is not defined, then <span class="docEmphasis">execvp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">execlp()</span> assume a default path list of <tt>.:/usr/bin:/bin</tt>.</p><p class="docText">As a security measure, the superuser account (<span class="docEmphasis">root</span>) is normally set up so that the current working directory is excluded from <tt>PATH</tt>. This prevents <span class="docEmphasis">root</span>
 from accidentally executing a file from the current working directory 
(which may have been deliberately placed there by a malicious user) with
 the same name as a standard command or with a name that is a 
misspelling of a common command (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">sl</span> instead of <span class="docEmphasis">ls</span>). In some Linux distributions, the default value for <tt>PATH</tt> also excludes the current working directory for unprivileged users. We assume such a <tt>PATH</tt>
 definition in all of the shell session logs shown in this book, which 
is why we always prefix ./ to the names of programs executed from the 
current working directory. (This also has the useful side effect of 
visually distinguishing our programs from standard commands in the shell
 session logs shown in this book.)</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">execvp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">execlp()</span> functions search for the filename in each of the directories named in <tt>PATH</tt>, starting from the beginning of the list and continuing until a file with the given name is successfully execed. Using the <tt>PATH</tt>
 environment variable in this way is useful if we don’t know the 
run-time location of an executable file or don’t want to create a 
hard-coded dependency on that location.</p><p class="docText">The use of <span class="docEmphasis">execvp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">execlp()</span> in set-user-ID or set-group-ID programs should be avoided, or at least approached with great caution. In particular, the <tt>PATH</tt>
 environment variable should be carefully controlled to prevent the 
execing of a malicious program. In practice, this means that the 
application should override any previously defined <tt>PATH</tt> value with a known-secure directory list.</p><p class="docText">Example 27-3 provides an example of the use of <span class="docEmphasis">execlp()</span>. The following shell session log demonstrates the use of this program to invoke the <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span> command (<tt>/bin/echo</tt>):</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>which echo </b>
/bin/echo
$ <b>ls -l /bin/echo </b>
-rwxr-xr-x    1 root      15428 Mar 19 21:28 /bin/echo
$ <b>echo $PATH </b>                      <i> Show contents of</i> <b>PATH </b>
<i> environment variable</i>
/home/mtk/bin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/bin:/bin/      bin <i> is in</i> PATH
$ <b>./t_execlp echo </b>                 execlp() <i> uses</i> PATH <i> to successfully find</i> echo
hello world

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The string <span class="docEmphasis">hello world</span> that appears above was supplied as the third argument of the call to <span class="docEmphasis">execlp()</span> in the program in Example 27-3.</p><p class="docText">We continue by redefining <tt>PATH</tt> to omit <tt>/bin</tt>, which is the directory containing the <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span> program:</p><pre>$ <b>PATH=/home/mtk/bin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/bin</b>
$ <b>./t_execlp echo</b>
ERROR [ENOENT No such file or directory] execlp
$ <b>./t_execlp /bin/echo</b>
hello world</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">As can be seen, when we supply a filename (i.e., a string containing no slashes) to <span class="docEmphasis">execlp()</span>, the call fails, since a file named <tt>echo</tt> was not found in any of the directories listed in <tt>PATH</tt>. On the other hand, when we provide a pathname containing one or more slashes, <span class="docEmphasis">execlp()</span> ignores the contents of <tt>PATH</tt>.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ENTDK">Example 27-3. Using <span class="docEmphasis">execlp()</span> to search for a filename in <tt>PATH</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre><b>procexec/t_execlp.c</b>
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    if (argc != 2 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s pathname\n", argv[0]);

    execlp(argv[1], argv[1], "hello world", (char *) NULL);
    errExit("execlp");          /* If we get here, something went wrong */
}
     <b>procexec/t_execlp.c</b></pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4TDK">27.2.2. Specifying Program Arguments as a List</h4><p class="docText">When we know the number of arguments for an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> at the time we write a program, we can use <span class="docEmphasis">execle()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">execlp()</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">execl()</span>
 to specify the arguments as a list within the function call. This can 
be convenient, since it requires less code than assembling the arguments
 in an <span class="docEmphasis">argv</span> vector. The program in Example 27-4 achieves the same result as the program in Example 27-1 but using <span class="docEmphasis">execle()</span> instead of <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span>.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EDWDK">Example 27-4. Using <span class="docEmphasis">execle()</span> to specify program arguments as a list</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre><b>procexec/t_execle.c</b>
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    char *envVec[] = { "GREET=salut", "BYE=adieu", NULL };
    char *filename;

    if (argc != 2 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s pathname\n", argv[0]);

    filename = strrchr(argv[1], '/');       /* Get basename from argv[1] */
    if (filename != NULL)
        filename++;
    else
        filename = argv[1];

    execle(argv[1], filename, "hello world", (char *) NULL, envVec);
    errExit("execle");          /* If we get here, something went wrong */
}
      <b>procexec/t_execle.c</b></pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERWDK">27.2.3. Passing the Caller’s Environment to the New Program</h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">execlp()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">execvp()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">execl()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">execv()</span>
 functions don’t permit the programmer to explicitly specify an 
environment list; instead, the new program inherits its environment from
 the calling process (Section 6.7).
 This may, or may not, be desirable. For security reasons, it is 
sometimes preferable to ensure that a program is execed with a known 
environment list. We consider this point further in Section 38.8.</p><p class="docText">Example 27-5 demonstrates that the new program inherits its environment from the caller during an <span class="docEmphasis">execl()</span> call. This program first uses <span class="docEmphasis">putenv()</span> to make a change to the environment that it inherits from the shell as a result of <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>. Then the <span class="docEmphasis">printenv</span> program is execed to display the values of the <tt>USER</tt> and <tt>SHELL</tt> environment variables. When we run this program, we see the following:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>echo $USER $SHELL </b>           <i> Display some of the shell’s environment variables</i>
blv /bin/bash
$ <b>./t_execl </b>
Initial value of USER: blv    <i> Copy of environment was inherited from the shell</i>
britta                        <i> These two lines are displayed by execed</i> printenv
/bin/bash

					  </pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EQYDK">Example 27-5. Passing the caller’s environment to the new program using <span class="docEmphasis">execl()</span></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre><b>procexec/t_execl.c</b>
#include &lt;stdlib.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    printf("Initial value of USER: %s\n", getenv("USER"));
    if (putenv("USER=britta") != 0)
        errExit("putenv");

    execl("/usr/bin/printenv", "printenv", "USER", "SHELL", (char *) NULL);
    errExit("execl");           /* If we get here, something went wrong */
}
     <b>procexec/t_execl.c</b></pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4YDK">27.2.4. Executing a File Referred to by a Descriptor: <span class="docEmphasis">fexecve()</span></h4><p class="docText">Since version 2.3.2, <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> provides <span class="docEmphasis">fexecve()</span>, which behaves just like <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span>, but specifies the file to be execed via the open file descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, rather than as a pathname. Using <span class="docEmphasis">fexecve()</span> is useful for applications that want to open a file, verify its contents by performing a checksum, and then execute the file.</p><pre>#define _GNU_SOURCE
#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

int <b>fexecve</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, char *const <span class="docEmphasis">argv</span>[], char *const <span class="docEmphasis">envp</span>[]);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Doesn’t return on success; returns -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Without <span class="docEmphasis">fexecve()</span>, we could <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>
 and read the file to verify its contents, and then exec it. However, 
this would allow the possibility that, between opening the file and 
execing it, the file was replaced (holding an open file descriptor 
doesn’t prevent a new file with the same name from being created), so 
that the content that was execed was different from the content that was
 checked.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
