<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>27.4. File Descriptors and exec()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">27.4. File Descriptors and <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span></h3><p class="docText">By default, all file descriptors opened by a program that calls <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> remain open across the <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>
 and are available for use by the new program. This is frequently 
useful, because the calling program may open files on particular 
descriptors, and these files are automatically available to the new 
program, without it needing to know the names of, or open, the files.</p><p class="docText">The
 shell takes advantage of this feature to handle I/O redirection for the
 programs that it executes. For example, suppose we enter the following 
shell command:</p><pre>$ <b>ls /tmp &gt; dir.txt</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The shell performs the following steps to execute this command:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> is performed to create a child process that is also running a copy of the shell (and thus has a copy of the command).</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The child shell opens <tt>dir.txt</tt> for output using file descriptor 1 (standard output). This can be done in either of the following ways:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The child shell closes descriptor 1 (<tt>STDOUT_FILENO</tt>) and then opens the file <tt>dir.txt</tt>. Since <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>
 always uses the lowest available file descriptor, and standard input 
(descriptor 0) remains open, the file will be opened on descriptor 1.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The shell opens <tt>dir.txt</tt>, obtaining a new file descriptor. Then, if that file descriptor is not standard output, the shell uses <span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span>
 to force standard output to be a duplicate of the new descriptor and 
closes the new descriptor, since it is no longer required. (This method 
is safer than the preceding method, since it doesn’t rely on 
lower-numbered descriptors being open.) The code sequence is something 
like the following:</p><pre>fd = open("dir.txt", O_WRONLY | O_CREAT,
            S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR | S_IRGRP | S_IWGRP |
 S_IROTH | S_IWOTH);                     /* rw-rw-rw- */
if (fd != STDOUT_FILENO) {
    dup2(fd, STDOUT_FILENO);
    close(fd);
}</pre><br/>
</div></li></ol></div></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The child shell execs the <span class="docEmphasis">ls</span> program. The <span class="docEmphasis">ls</span> program writes its output to standard output, which is the file <tt>dir.txt</tt>.</p></div></li></ol></div><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The
 explanation given here of how the shell performs I/O redirections 
simplifies some points. In particular, certain commands—so-called shell <span class="docEmphasis">built-in</span> commands—are executed directly by the shell, without performing a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> or an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>. Such commands must be treated somewhat differently for the purposes of I/O redirection.</p><p class="docText">A
 shell command is implemented as a built-in for either of two reasons: 
efficiency and to obtain side effects within the shell. Some frequently 
used commands—such as <span class="docEmphasis">pwd</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">test</span>—are
 sufficiently simple that it is a worthwhile efficiency to implement 
them inside the shell. Other commands are implemented within the shell 
so that they have side effects on the shell itself—that is, they change 
information stored by the shell, or modify attributes of or affect the 
execution of the shell process. For example, the <span class="docEmphasis">cd</span>
 command must change the working directory of the shell itself, and so 
can’t be executed within a separate process. Other examples of commands 
that are built in for their side effects include <span class="docEmphasis">exec</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">exit</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">read</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">set</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">source</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ulimit</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">umask</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">wait</span>, and the shell job-control commands (<span class="docEmphasis">jobs</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fg</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">bg</span>). The full set of built-in commands understood by a shell is documented in the shell’s manual page.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4FDK">27.4.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EBGDK">27.4.1.1. The close-on-exec flag (<tt>FD_CLOEXEC</tt>)</h5><p class="docText">Sometimes, it may be desirable to ensure that certain file descriptors are closed before an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>. In particular, if we <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>
 an unknown program (i.e., one that we did not write) from a privileged 
process, or a program that doesn’t need descriptors for files we have 
already opened, then it is secure programming practice to ensure that 
all unnecessary file descriptors are closed before the new program is 
loaded. We could do this by calling <span class="docEmphasis">close()</span> on all such descriptors, but this suffers the following limitations:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The
 file descriptor may have been opened by a library function. This 
function has no mechanism to force the main program to close the file 
descriptor before the <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>
 is performed. (As a general principle, library functions should always 
set the close-on-exec flag, using the technique described below, for any
 files that they open.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">If the <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>
 call fails for some reason, we may want to keep the file descriptors 
open. If they are already closed, it may be difficult, or impossible, to
 reopen them so that they refer to the same files.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">For
 these reasons, the kernel provides a close-on-exec flag for each file 
descriptor. If this flag is set, then the file descriptor is 
automatically closed during a successful <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, but left open if the <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> fails. The close-on-exec flag for a file descriptor can be accessed using the <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> system call (Section 5.2). The <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> <tt>F_GETFD</tt> operation retrieves a copy of the file descriptor flags:</p><pre>int flags;

flags = fcntl(fd, F_GETFD);
if (flags == -1)
    errExit("fcntl");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">After retrieving these flags, we can modify the <tt>FD_CLOEXEC</tt> bit and use a second <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> call specifying <tt>F_SETFD</tt> to update the flags:</p><pre>flags |= FD_CLOEXEC;
if (fcntl(fd, F_SETFD, flags) == -1)
    errExit("fcntl");</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText"><tt>FD_CLOEXEC</tt>
 is actually the only bit used in the file descriptor flags. This bit 
corresponds to the value 1. In older programs, we may sometimes see the 
close-on-exec flag set using just the call <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl(fd, F_SETFD, 1)</span>,
 relying on the fact that there are no other bits that can be affected 
by this operation. Theoretically, this may not always be so (in the 
future, some UNIX system might implement additional flag bits), so we 
should use the technique shown in the main text.</p><p class="docText">Many UNIX implementations, including Linux, also allow the close-on-exec flag to be modified using two unstandardized <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> calls: <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl(fd, FIOCLEX)</span> to set the close-on-exec flag for <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl(fd, FIONCLEX)</span> to clear the flag.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">When <span class="docEmphasis">dup()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>
 is used to create a duplicate of a file descriptor, the close-on-exec 
flag is always cleared for the duplicate descriptor. (This behavior is 
historical and an SUSv3 requirement.)</p><p class="docText">Example 27-6
 demonstrates the manipulation of the close-on-exec flag. Depending on 
the presence of a command-line argument (any string), this program first
 sets the close-on-exec flag for standard output and then execs the <span class="docEmphasis">ls</span> program. Here is what we see when we run the program:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>./closeonexec </b>                     <i> Exec ls without closing standard output</i>
-rwxr-xr-x   1 mtk    users    28098 Jun 15 13:59 closeonexec
$ <b>./closeonexec n </b>                   <i> Sets close-on-exec flag for standard output</i>
ls: write error: Bad file descriptor

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In the second run shown above, <span class="docEmphasis">ls</span> detects that its standard output is closed and prints an error message on standard error.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EDLDK">Example 27-6. Setting the close-on-exec flag for a file descriptor</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedWidth"><b>procexec/closeonexec.c</b>
#include &lt;fcntl.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int flags;

    if (argc &gt; 1) {
        flags = fcntl(STDOUT_FILENO, F_GETFD);              /* Fetch flags */
        if (flags == -1)
            errExit("fcntl - F_GETFD");

        flags |= FD_CLOEXEC;                    /* Turn on FD_CLOEXEC */

        if (fcntl(STDOUT_FILENO, F_SETFD, flags) == -1)     /* Update flags */
            errExit("fcntl - F_SETFD");
    }

    execlp("ls", "ls", "-l", argv[0], (char *) NULL);
    errExit("execlp");
}
     <b>procexec/closeonexec.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
