<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>27.5. Signals and exec()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">27.5. Signals and <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span></h3><p class="docText">During an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>,
 the text of the existing process is discarded. This text may include 
signal handlers established by the calling program. Because the handlers
 disappear, the kernel resets the dispositions of all handled signals to
 <tt>SIG_DFL</tt>. The dispositions of all other signals (i.e., those with dispositions of <tt>SIG_IGN</tt> or <tt>SIG_DFL</tt>) are left unchanged by an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>. This behavior is required by SUSv3.</p><p class="docText">SUSv3 makes a special case for an ignored <tt>SIGCHLD</tt> signal. (We noted in Section 26.3.3 that ignoring <tt>SIGCHLD</tt> prevents the creation of zombies.) SUSv3 leaves it unspecified whether an ignored <tt>SIGCHLD</tt> remains ignored across an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> or its disposition is reset to <tt>SIG_DFL</tt>.
 Linux does the former, but some other UNIX implementations (e.g., 
Solaris) do the latter. This implies that, in programs that ignore <tt>SIGCHLD</tt>, for maximum portability, we should perform a <span class="docEmphasis">signal(SIGCHLD, SIG_DFL)</span> call prior to an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, and ensure that we don’t write programs that rely on the initial disposition of <tt>SIGCHLD</tt> being anything other than <tt>SIG_DFL</tt>.</p><p class="docText">The destruction of the old program’s data, heap, and stack also means that any alternate signal stack established by a call to <span class="docEmphasis">sigaltstack()</span> (Section 21.3) is lost. Since an alternate signal stack is not preserved across an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, the <tt>SA_ONSTACK</tt> bit is also cleared for all signals.</p><p class="docText">During an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>,
 the process signal mask and set of pending signals are both preserved. 
This feature allows us to block and queue signals for the newly execed 
program. However, SUSv3 notes that many existing applications wrongly 
assume that they are started with the disposition of certain signals set
 to <tt>SIG_DFL</tt> or that these signals are 
unblocked. (In particular, the C standards provide a much weaker 
specification of signals, which doesn’t specify signal blocking; 
therefore, C programs written on non-UNIX systems won’t know to unblock 
signals.) For this reason, SUSv3 recommends that signals should not be 
blocked or ignored across an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>
 of an arbitrary program. Here, “arbitrary” means a program that we did 
not write. It is acceptable to block or ignore signals when execing a 
program we have written or one with known behavior with respect to 
signals.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
