<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>27.8. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">27.8. Summary</h3><p class="docText">Using <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span>, a process can replace the program that it is currently running by a new program. Arguments to the <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span> call allow the specification of the argument list (<span class="docEmphasis">argv</span>) and environment list for the new program. Various similarly named library functions are layered on top of <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span> and provide different interfaces to the same functionality.</p><p class="docText">All of the <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>
 functions can be used to load a binary executable file or to execute an
 interpreter script. When a process execs a script, the script’s 
interpreter program replaces the program currently being executed by the
 process. The script’s interpreter is normally identified by an initial 
line (starting with the characters <tt>#!</tt>) in 
the script that specifies the pathname of the interpreter. If no such 
line is present, then the script is executable only via <span class="docEmphasis">execlp()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">execvp()</span>, and these functions exec the shell as the script interpreter.</p><p class="docText">We showed how <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span> can be combined to implement the <span class="docEmphasis">system()</span> function, which can be used to execute an arbitrary shell command.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDKDK">27.8.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EHKDK">27.8.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">Refer to the sources of further information listed in Section 24.6.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
