<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>27.9. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">27.9. Exercises</h3><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The final command in the following shell session uses the program in Example 27-3 to exec the program <span class="docEmphasis">xyz</span>. What happens?</p><pre>$ <b>echo $PATH</b>
/usr/local/bin:/usr/bin:/bin:./dir1:./dir2
$ <b>ls -l dir1</b>
total 8
-rw-r—r—   1 mtk      users        7860 Jun 13 11:55 xyz
$ <b>ls -l dir2</b>
total 28
-rwxr-xr-x   1 mtk      users       27452 Jun 13 11:55 xyz
$ <b>./t_execlp xyz</b></pre><br/>
</div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Use <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span> to implement <span class="docEmphasis">execlp()</span>. You will need to use the <span class="docEmphasis">stdarg(3)</span> API to handle the variable-length argument list supplied to <span class="docEmphasis">execlp()</span>. You will also need to use functions in the <span class="docEmphasis">malloc</span>
 package to allocate space for the argument and environment vectors. 
Finally, note that an easy way of checking whether a file exists in a 
particular directory and is executable is simply to try execing the 
file.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">What output would we see if we make the following script executable and <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> it?</p><pre>#!/bin/cat -n
Hello world</pre><br/>
</div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">What is the effect of the following code? In what circumstances might it be useful?</p><pre>childPid = fork();
if (childPid == -1)
    errExit("fork1");
if (childPid == 0) {    /* Child */
    switch (fork()) {
    case -1: errExit("fork2");

    case 0:             /* Grandchild */
        /* ——- Do real work here ——- */
        exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);             /* After doing real work */

    default:
        exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);             /* Make grandchild an orphan */
    }
}

/* Parent falls through to here */

if (waitpid(childPid, &amp;status, 0) == -1)
    errExit("waitpid");

/* Parent carries on to do other things */</pre><br/>
</div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">When we run the following program, we find it produces no output. Why is this?</p><pre>#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    printf("Hello world");
    execlp("sleep", "sleep", "0", (char *) NULL);
}</pre><br/>
</div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Suppose that a parent process has established a handler for <tt>SIGCHLD</tt> and also blocked this signal. Subsequently, one of its children exits, and the parent then does a <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span> to collect the child’s status. What happens when the parent unblocks <tt>SIGCHLD</tt>? Write a program to verify your answer. What is the relevance of the result for a program calling the <span class="docEmphasis">system()</span> function?</p></div></li></ol></div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
