<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>28.1. Process Accounting</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">28.1. Process Accounting</h3><p class="docText">When
 process accounting is enabled, the kernel writes an accounting record 
to the system-wide process accounting file as each process terminates. 
This accounting record contains various information maintained by the 
kernel about the process, including its termination status and how much 
CPU time it consumed. The accounting file can be analyzed by standard 
tools (<span class="docEmphasis">sa(8)</span> summarizes information from the accounting file, and <span class="docEmphasis">lastcomm(1)</span> lists information about previously executed commands) or by tailored applications.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In
 kernels before 2.6.10, a separate process accounting record was written
 for each thread created using the NPTL threading implementation. Since 
kernel 2.6.10, a single accounting record is written for the entire 
process when the last thread terminates. Under the older LinuxThreads 
threading implementation, a single process accounting record is always 
written for each thread.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Historically,
 the primary use of process accounting was to charge users for 
consumption of system resources on multiuser UNIX systems. However, 
process accounting can also be useful for obtaining information about a 
process that was not otherwise monitored and reported on by its parent.</p><p class="docText">Although
 available on most UNIX implementations, process accounting is not 
specified in SUSv3. The format of the accounting records, as well as the
 location of the accounting file, vary somewhat across implementations. 
We describe the details for Linux in this section, noting some 
variations from other UNIX implementations along the way.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On Linux, process accounting is an optional kernel component that is configured via the option <tt>CONFIG_BSD_PROCESS_ACCT</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EIMDK">28.1.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EMMDK">28.1.1.1. Enabling and disabling process accounting</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">acct()</span> system call is used by a privileged (<tt>CAP_SYS_PACCT</tt>)
 process to enable and disable process accounting. This system call is 
rarely used in application programs. Normally, process accounting is 
enabled at each system restart by placing appropriate commands in the 
system boot scripts.</p><pre>#define _BSD_SOURCE
#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

int <b>acct</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">acctfile</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">To enable process accounting, we supply the pathname of an <span class="docEmphasis">existing</span> regular file in <span class="docEmphasis">acctfile</span>. A typical pathname for the accounting file is <tt>/var/log/pacct</tt> or <tt>/usr/account/pacct</tt>. To disable process accounting, we specify <span class="docEmphasis">acctfile</span> as <tt>NULL</tt>.</p><p class="docText">The program in Example 28-1 uses <span class="docEmphasis">acct()</span> to switch process accounting on and off. The functionality of this program is similar to the shell <span class="docEmphasis">accton(8)</span> command.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EXPDK">Example 28-1. Turning process accounting on and off</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre><b>procexec/acct_on.c</b>
#define _BSD_SOURCE
#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    if (argc &gt; 2 || (argc &gt; 1 &amp;&amp; strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0))
        usageErr("%s [file]\n");

    if (acct(argv[1]) == -1)
        errExit("acct");

    printf("Process accounting %s\n",
            (argv[1] == NULL) ? "disabled" : "enabled");
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>procexec/acct_on.c</b></pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ECQDK">28.1.1.2. Process accounting records</h5><p class="docText">Once process accounting is enabled, an <span class="docEmphasis">acct</span> record is written to the accounting file as each process terminates. The <span class="docEmphasis">acct</span> structure is defined in <tt>&lt;sys/acct.h&gt;</tt> as follows:</p><pre class="preFixedHeight">typedef u_int16_t comp_t;  /* See text */

struct acct {
    char      ac_flag;     /* Accounting flags (see text) */
    u_int16_t ac_uid;      /* User ID of process */
    u_int16_t ac_gid;      /* Group ID of process */
    u_int16_t ac_tty;      /* Controlling terminal for process (may be
                              0 if none, e.g., for a daemon) */
    u_int32_t ac_btime;    /* Start time (time_t; seconds since the Epoch) */
    comp_t    ac_utime;    /* User CPU time (clock ticks) */
    comp_t    ac_stime;    /* System CPU time (clock ticks) */
    comp_t    ac_etime;    /* Elapsed (real) time (clock ticks) */
    comp_t    ac_mem;      /* Average memory usage (kilobytes) */
    comp_t    ac_io;       /* Bytes transferred by read(2) and write(2)
                              (unused) */
    comp_t    ac_rw;       /* Blocks read/written (unused) */
    comp_t    ac_minflt;   /* Minor page faults (Linux-specific) */
    comp_t    ac_majflt;   /* Major page faults (Linux-specific) */
    comp_t    ac_swaps;    /* Number of swaps (unused; Linux-specific) */
    u_int32_t ac_exitcode; /* Process termination status */
#define ACCT_COMM 16
    char      ac_comm[ACCT_COMM+1];
                           /* (Null-terminated) command name
                              (basename of last execed file) */
    char      ac_pad[10];  /* Padding (reserved for future use) */
};

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Note the following points regarding the <span class="docEmphasis">acct</span> structure:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">u_int16_t</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">u_int32_t</span> data types are 16-bit and 32-bit unsigned integers.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">ac_flag</span> field is a bit mask recording various events for the process. The bits that can appear in this field are shown in Table 28-1.
 As indicated in the table, some of these bits are not present on all 
UNIX implementations. A few other implementations provide additional 
bits in this field.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">ac_comm</span> field records the name of the last command (program file) executed by this process. The kernel records this value on each <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span>. On some other UNIX implementations, this field is limited to 8 characters.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">comp_t</span> type is a kind of floating-point number. Values of this type are sometimes called <span class="docEmphasis">compressed clock ticks</span>.
 The floating-point value consists of a 3-bit, base-8 exponent, followed
 by a 13-bit mantissa; the exponent can represent a factor in the range 8<sup>0</sup>=1 to 8<sup>7</sup> (2,097,152). For example, a mantissa of 125 and an exponent of 1 represent the value 1000. Example 28-2 defines a function (<span class="docEmphasis">comptToLL()</span>) to convert this type to <span class="docEmphasis">long long</span>. We need to use the type <span class="docEmphasis">long long</span> because the 32 bits used to represent an <span class="docEmphasis">unsigned long</span> on x86-32 are insufficient to hold the largest value that can be represented in <span class="docEmphasis">comp_t</span>, which is (2<sup>13</sup> - 1) * 87.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The three time fields defined with the type <span class="docEmphasis">comp_t</span> represent time in system clock ticks. Therefore, we must divide these times by the value returned by <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf(_SC_CLK_TCK)</span> in order to convert them to seconds.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">ac_exitcode</span> field holds the termination status of the process (described in Section 26.1.3). Most other UNIX implementations instead provide a single-byte field named <span class="docEmphasis">ac_stat</span>,
 which records only the signal that killed the process (if it was killed
 by a signal) and a bit indicating whether that signal caused the 
process to dump core. BSD-derived implementations don’t provide either 
field.</p></li></ul><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 28-1. Bit values for the <span class="docEmphasis">ac_flag</span> field of process accounting records</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Bit</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>AFORK</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Process was created by <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, but did not <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> before terminating</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ASU</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Process made use of superuser privileges</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>AXSIG</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Process was terminated by a signal (not present on some implementations)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ACORE</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Process produced a core dump (not present on some implementations)</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">Because
 accounting records are written only as processes terminate, they are 
ordered by termination time (a value not recorded in the record), rather
 than by process start time (<span class="docEmphasis">ac_btime</span>).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">If the system crashes, no accounting record is written for any processes that are still executing.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Since writing records to the accounting file can rapidly consume disk space, Linux provides the <tt>/proc/sys/kernel/acct</tt>
 virtual file for controlling the operation of process accounting. This 
file contains three numbers, defining (in order) the parameters <span class="docEmphasis">high-water</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">low-water</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">frequency</span>.
 Typical defaults for these three parameters are 4, 2, and 30. If 
process accounting is enabled and the amount of free disk space falls 
below <span class="docEmphasis">low-water</span> percent, accounting is suspended. If the amount of free disk space later rises above <span class="docEmphasis">high-water</span> percent, then accounting is resumed. The <span class="docEmphasis">frequency</span> value specifies how often, in seconds, checks should be made on the percentage of free disk space.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ESXDK">28.1.1.3. Example program</h5><p class="docText">The program in Example 28-2
 displays selected fields from the records in a process accounting file.
 The following shell session demonstrates the use of this program. We 
begin by creating a new, empty process accounting file and enabling 
process accounting:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>su </b>                            <i> Need privilege to enable process accounting</i>
Password:
# <b>touch pacct </b>
# <b>./acct_on pacct </b>
               <i> This process will be first entry in accounting file</i>
Process accounting enabled
# <b>exit </b>                          <i> Cease being superuser</i>

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">At this point, three processes have already terminated since we enabled process accounting. These processes executed the <span class="docEmphasis">acct_on</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">su</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">bash</span> programs. The <span class="docEmphasis">bash</span> process was started by <span class="docEmphasis">su</span> to run the privileged shell session.</p><p class="docText">Now we run a series of commands to add further records to the accounting file:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>sleep 15 &amp; </b>
[1] 18063
$ <b>ulimit -c unlimited </b>           <i> Allow core dumps (shell built-in)</i>
$ <b>cat </b>                           <i> Create a process</i>
<i> Type Control-\ (generates</i> SIGQUIT <i> , signal 3) to kill cat process</i>
Quit (core dumped)
$
<i> Press Enter to see shell notification</i>
 <i> of completion of sleep before next shell prompt</i>
[1]+  Done          sleep 15
$ <b>grep xxx badfile </b>              <i> grep fails with status of 2</i>
grep: badfile: No such file or directory
$ <b>echo $? </b>                       <i> The shell obtained status of grep (shell built-in)</i>
2

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The next two commands run programs that we presented in previous chapters (Example 27-1, in Section 27.2, and Example 24-1, in Section 24.2.1). The first command runs a program that execs the file <tt>/bin/echo</tt>; this results in an accounting record with the command name <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span>. The second command creates a child process that doesn’t perform an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>.</p><pre>$ <b>./t_execve /bin/echo</b>
hello world goodbye
$ <b>./t_fork</b>
PID=18350 (child) idata=333 istack=666
PID=18349 (parent) idata=111 istack=222</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Finally, we use the program in Example 28-2 to view the contents of the accounting file:</p><pre>$ <b>./acct_view pacct</b>
command  flags   term.  user     start time            CPU   elapsed
                status                                 time    time
acct_on   -S--      0   root     2010-07-23 17:19:05   0.00    0.00
bash      ----      0   root     2010-07-23 17:18:55   0.02   21.10
su        -S--      0   root     2010-07-23 17:18:51   0.01   24.94
cat       --XC   0x83   mtk      2010-07-23 17:19:55   0.00    1.72
sleep     ----      0   mtk      2010-07-23 17:19:42   0.00   15.01
grep      ----  0x200   mtk      2010-07-23 17:20:12   0.00    0.00
echo      ----      0   mtk      2010-07-23 17:21:15   0.01    0.01
t_fork    F---      0   mtk      2010-07-23 17:21:36   0.00    0.00
t_fork    ----      0   mtk      2010-07-23 17:21:36   0.00    3.01</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In the output, we see one line for each process that was created in the shell session. The <span class="docEmphasis">ulimit</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span> commands are shell built-in commands, so they don’t result in the creation of new processes. Note that the entry for <span class="docEmphasis">sleep</span> appeared in the accounting file after the <span class="docEmphasis">cat</span> entry because the <span class="docEmphasis">sleep</span> command terminated after the <span class="docEmphasis">cat</span> command.</p><p class="docText">Most of the output is self-explanatory. The <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> column shows single letters indicating which of the <span class="docEmphasis">ac_flag</span> bits is set in each record (see Table 28-1). Section 26.1.3 describes how to interpret the termination status values shown in the <span class="docEmphasis">term. status</span> column.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EL5DK">Example 28-2. Displaying data from a process accounting file</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>procexec/acct_view.c</b>
#include &lt;fcntl.h&gt;
#include &lt;time.h&gt;
#include &lt;sys/stat.h&gt;
#include &lt;sys/acct.h&gt;
#include &lt;limits.h&gt;
#include "ugid_functions.h"             /* Declaration of userNameFromId() */
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

#define TIME_BUF_SIZE 100

static long long                /* Convert comp_t value into long long */
comptToLL(comp_t ct)
{
    const int EXP_SIZE = 3;             /* 3-bit, base-8 exponent */
    const int MANTISSA_SIZE = 13;       /* Followed by 13-bit mantissa */
    const int MANTISSA_MASK = (1 &lt;&lt; MANTISSA_SIZE) - 1;
    long long mantissa, exp;

    mantissa = ct &amp; MANTISSA_MASK;
    exp = (ct &gt;&gt; MANTISSA_SIZE) &amp; ((1 &lt;&lt; EXP_SIZE) - 1);
    return mantissa &lt;&lt; (exp * 3);       /* Power of 8 = left shift 3 bits */
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int acctFile;
    struct acct ac;
    ssize_t numRead;
    char *s;
    char timeBuf[TIME_BUF_SIZE];
    struct tm *loc;
    time_t t;

    if (argc != 2 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s file\n", argv[0]);

    acctFile = open(argv[1], O_RDONLY);
    if (acctFile == -1)
        errExit("open");

    printf("command  flags   term.  user     "
            "start time            CPU   elapsed\n");
    printf("                status           "
            "                      time    time\n");

    while ((numRead = read(acctFile, &amp;ac, sizeof(struct acct))) &gt; 0) {
        if (numRead != sizeof(struct acct))
            fatal("partial read");

        printf("%-8.8s  ", ac.ac_comm);

        printf("%c", (ac.ac_flag &amp; AFORK) ? 'F' : '-') ;
        printf("%c", (ac.ac_flag &amp; ASU)   ? 'S' : '-') ;
        printf("%c", (ac.ac_flag &amp; AXSIG) ? 'X' : '-') ;
        printf("%c", (ac.ac_flag &amp; ACORE) ? 'C' : '-') ;

#ifdef __linux__
        printf(" %#6lx   ", (unsigned long) ac.ac_exitcode);
#else   /* Many other implementations provide ac_stat instead */
        printf(" %#6lx   ", (unsigned long) ac.ac_stat);
#endif

        s = userNameFromId(ac.ac_uid);
        printf("%-8.8s ", (s == NULL) ? "???" : s);

        t = ac.ac_btime;
        loc = localtime(&amp;t);
        if (loc == NULL) {
            printf("???Unknown time???  ");
        } else {
            strftime(timeBuf, TIME_BUF_SIZE, "%Y-%m-%d %T ", loc);
            printf("%s ", timeBuf);
        }

        printf("%5.2f %7.2f ", (double) (comptToLL(ac.ac_utime) +
                    comptToLL(ac.ac_stime)) / sysconf(_SC_CLK_TCK),
                (double) comptToLL(ac.ac_etime) / sysconf(_SC_CLK_TCK));
        printf("\n");
    }

    if (numRead == -1)
        errExit("read");

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>procexec/acct_view.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EW5DK">28.1.1.4. Process accounting Version 3 file format</h5><p class="docText">Starting
 with kernel 2.6.8, Linux introduced an optional alternative version of 
the process accounting file that addresses some limitations of the 
traditional accounting file. To use this alternative version, known as <span class="docEmphasis">Version 3</span>, the <tt>CONFIG_BSD_PROCESS_ACCT_V3</tt> kernel configuration option must be enabled before building the kernel.</p><p class="docText">When
 using the Version 3 option, the only difference in the operation of 
process accounting is in the format of records written to the accounting
 file. The new format is defined as follows:</p><pre class="preFixedHeight">struct acct_v3 {
    char      ac_flag;        /* Accounting flags */
    char      ac_version;     /* Accounting version (3) */
    u_int16_t ac_tty;         /* Controlling terminal for process */
    u_int32_t ac_exitcode;    /* Process termination status */
    u_int32_t ac_uid;         /* 32-bit user ID of process */
    u_int32_t ac_gid;         /* 32-bit group ID of process */
    u_int32_t ac_pid;         /* Process ID */
    u_int32_t ac_ppid;        /* Parent process ID */
    u_int32_t ac_btime;       /* Start time (time_t) */
    float     ac_etime;       /* Elapsed (real) time (clock ticks) */
    comp_t    ac_utime;       /* User CPU time (clock ticks) */
    comp_t    ac_stime;       /* System CPU time (clock ticks) */
    comp_t    ac_mem;         /* Average memory usage (kilobytes) */
    comp_t    ac_io;          /* Bytes read/written (unused) */
    comp_t    ac_rw;          /* Blocks read/written (unused) */
    comp_t    ac_minflt;      /* Minor page faults */
    comp_t    ac_majflt;      /* Major page faults */
    comp_t    ac_swaps;       /* Number of swaps (unused; Linux-specific) */
#define ACCT_COMM 16
    char      ac_comm[ACCT_COMM];   /* Command name */
};

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The following are the main differences between the <span class="docEmphasis">acct_v3</span> structure and the traditional Linux <span class="docEmphasis">acct</span> structure:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">ac_version</span> field is added. This field contains the version number of this type of accounting record. This field is always 3 for an <span class="docEmphasis">acct_v3</span> record.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The fields <span class="docEmphasis">ac_pid</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ac_ppid</span>, containing the process ID and parent process ID of the terminated process, are added.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">ac_uid</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ac_gid</span>
 fields are widened from 16 to 32 bits, to accommodate the 32-bit user 
and group IDs that were introduced in Linux 2.4. (Large user and group 
IDs can’t be correctly represented in the traditional <span class="docEmphasis">acct</span> file.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">The type of the <span class="docEmphasis">ac_etime</span> field is changed from <span class="docEmphasis">comp_t</span> to <span class="docEmphasis">float</span>, to allow longer elapsed times to be recorded.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">We provide a Version 3 analog of the program in Example 28-2 in the file <tt>procexec/acct_v3_view.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
