<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>28.3. Speed of Process Creation</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">28.3. Speed of Process Creation</h3><p class="docText">Table 28-3
 shows some speed comparisons for different methods of process creation.
 The results were obtained using a test program that executed a loop 
that repeatedly created a child process and then waited for it to 
terminate. The table compares the various methods using three different 
process memory sizes, as indicated by the <span class="docEmphasis">Total virtual memory</span> value. The differences in memory size were simulated by having the program <span class="docEmphasis">malloc()</span> additional memory on the heap prior to performing the timings.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Values for process size (<span class="docEmphasis">Total virtual memory</span>) in Table 28-3 are taken from the <span class="docEmphasis">VSZ</span> value displayed by the command <span class="docEmphasis">ps -o “pid vsz cmd”</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 28-3. Time required to create 100,000 processes using <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">clone()</span></h5></caption><colgroup span="7"><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" rowspan="3" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom">Method of process creation</th><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" colspan="6" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom">Total Virtual Memory</th></tr><tr><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" colspan="2" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom">1.70 MB</th><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" colspan="2" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom">2.70 MB</th><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" colspan="2" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom">11.70 MB</th></tr><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Time (secs)</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Rate</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Time (secs)</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Rate</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Time (secs)</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Rate</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>22.27 (7.99)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>4544</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>26.38 (8.98)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>4135</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>126.93(52.55)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>1276</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>3.52 (2.49)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>28955</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>3.55 (2.50)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>28621</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>3.53 (2.51)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>28810</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">clone()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>2.97 (2.14)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>34333</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>2.98 (2.13)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>34217</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>2.93 (2.10)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>34688</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">fork() + exec()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>135.72(12.39)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>764</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>146.15(16.69)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>719</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>260.34(61.86)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>435</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">vfork() + exec()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>107.36 (6.27)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>969</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>107.81 (6.35)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>964</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>107.97 (6.38)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>960</tt></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">For each process size, two types of statistics are provided in Table 28-3:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The
 first statistic consists of two time measurements. The main (larger) 
measurement is the total elapsed (real) time to perform 100,000 process 
creation operations. The second time, shown in parentheses, is the CPU 
time consumed by the parent process. Since these tests were run on an 
otherwise unloaded machine, the difference between the two time values 
represents the total time consumed by child processes created during the
 test.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The second statistic for each test shows the rate at which processes were created per (real) second.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Statistics shown are the average of 20 runs for each case, and were obtained using kernel 2.6.27 running on an x86-32 system.</p><p class="docText">The
 first three data rows show times for simple process creation (without 
execing a new program in the child). In each case, the child processes 
exit immediately after they are created, and the parent waits for each 
child to terminate before creating the next.</p><p class="docText">The first row contains values for the <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> system call. From the data, we can see that as a process gets larger, <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>
 takes longer. These time differences show the additional time required 
to duplicate increasingly large page tables for the child and mark all 
data, heap, and stack segment page entries as read-only. (No <span class="docEmphasis">pages</span> are copied, since the child doesn’t modify its data or stack segments.)</p><p class="docText">The second data row provides the same statistics for <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span>. We see that as the process size increases, the times remain the same—because no page tables or pages are copied during a <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span>, the virtual memory size of the calling process has no effect. The difference between the <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> statistics represents the total time required for copying process page tables in each case.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Small variations in the <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">clone()</span> values in Table 28-3
 are due to sampling errors and scheduling variations. Even when 
creating processes up to 300 MB in size, times for these two system 
calls remained constant.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The third data row shows statistics for process creation using <span class="docEmphasis">clone()</span> with the following flags:</p><pre>CLONE_VM | CLONE_VFORK | CLONE_FS | CLONE_SIGHAND | CLONE_FILES</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The first two of these flags emulate the behavior of <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span>.
 The remaining flags specify that the parent and child should share 
their file-system attributes (umask, root directory, and current working
 directory), table of signal dispositions, and table of open file 
descriptors. The difference between the <span class="docEmphasis">clone()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> data represents the small amount of additional work performed in <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span>
 to copy this information into the child process. The cost of copying 
file-system attributes and the table of signal dispositions is constant.
 However, the cost of copying the table of open file descriptors varies 
according to the number of descriptors. For example, opening 100 file 
descriptors in the parent process raised the <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> real time (in the first column of the table) from 3.52 to 5.04 seconds, but left times for <span class="docEmphasis">clone()</span> unaffected.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The timings for <span class="docEmphasis">clone()</span> are for the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc clone()</span> wrapper function, rather than direct calls to <span class="docEmphasis">sys_clone()</span>. Other tests (not summarized here) revealed negligible timing differences between using <span class="docEmphasis">sys_clone()</span> and calling <span class="docEmphasis">clone()</span> with a child function that immediately exited.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The differences between <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> are quite marked. However, the following points should be kept in mind:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The final data column, where <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> is more than 30 times faster than <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, corresponds to a large process. Typical processes would lie somewhere closer to the first two columns of the table.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Because the times required for process creation are typically much smaller than those required for an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, the differences are much less marked if a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> is followed by an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>. This is illustrated by the final pair of data rows in Table 28-3, where each child performs an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, rather than immediately exiting. The program execed was the <span class="docEmphasis">true</span> command (<tt>/bin/true</tt>, chosen because it produces no output). In this case, we see that the relative differences between <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> are much lower.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In fact, the data shown in Table 28-3 doesn’t reveal the full cost of an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>,
 because the child execs the same program in each loop of the test. As a
 result, the cost of disk I/O to read the program into memory is 
essentially eliminated, because the program will be read into the kernel
 buffer cache on the first <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>,
 and then remain there. If each loop of the test execed a different 
program (e.g., a differently named copy of the same program), then we 
would observe a greater cost for an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
