<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>28.5. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">28.5. Summary</h3><p class="docText">When
 process accounting is enabled, the kernel writes an accounting record 
to a file for each process that terminates on the system. This record 
contains statistics on the resources used by the process.</p><p class="docText">Like <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, the Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">clone()</span>
 system call creates a new process, but allows finer control over which 
attributes are shared between the parent and child. This system call is 
used primarily for implementing threading libraries.</p><p class="docText">We compared the speed of process creation using <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">clone()</span>. Although <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span> is faster than <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>,
 the time difference between these system calls is small by comparison 
with the time required for a child process to do a subsequent <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>.</p><p class="docText">When a child process is created via <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>,
 it inherits copies of (or in some cases shares) certain process 
attributes from its parent, while other process attributes are not 
inherited. For example, a child inherits copies of its parent’s file 
descriptor table and signal dispositions, but doesn’t inherit its 
parent’s interval timers, record locks, or set of pending signals. 
Correspondingly, when a process performs an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>,
 certain process attributes remain unchanged, while others are reset to 
defaults. For example, the process ID remains the same, file descriptors
 remain open (unless marked close-on-exec), interval timers are 
preserved, and pending signals remain pending, but handled signals are 
reset to their default disposition and shared memory segments are 
detached.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EYWDK">28.5.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E3WDK">28.5.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">Refer to the sources of further information listed in Section 24.6. Chapter 17
 of [Frisch, 2002] describes the administration of process accounting, 
as well as some of the variations across UNIX implementations. [Bovet 
&amp; Cesati, 2005] describes the implementation of the <span class="docEmphasis">clone()</span> system call.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
