<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>29.2. Background Details of the Pthreads API</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">29.2. Background Details of the Pthreads API</h3><p class="docText">In
 the late 1980s and early 1990s, several different threading APIs 
existed. In 1995, POSIX.1c standardized the POSIX threads API, and this 
standard was later incorporated into SUSv3.</p><p class="docText">Several concepts apply to the Pthreads API as a whole, and we briefly introduce these before looking in detail at the API.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EV1DK">29.2.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EZ1DK">29.2.1.1. Pthreads data types</h5><p class="docText">The Pthreads API defines a number of data types, some of which are listed in Table 29-1. We describe most of these data types in the following pages.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 29-1. Pthreads data types</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Data type</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">pthread_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Thread identifier</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">pthread_mutex_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Mutex</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">pthread_mutexattr_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Mutex attributes object</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Condition variable</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">pthread_condattr_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Condition variable attributes object</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">pthread_key_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Key for thread-specific data</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">pthread_once_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">One-time initialization control context</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">pthread_attr_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Thread attributes object</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">SUSv3
 doesn’t specify how these data types should be represented, and 
portable programs should treat them as opaque data. By this, we mean 
that a program should avoid any reliance on knowledge of the structure 
or contents of a variable of one of these types. In particular, we can’t
 compare variables of these types using the C <span class="docEmphasis">==</span> operator.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EO5DK">29.2.1.2. Threads and <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span></h5><p class="docText">In the traditional UNIX API, <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>
 is a global integer variable. However, this doesn’t suffice for 
threaded programs. If a thread made a function call that returned an 
error in a global <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> variable, then this would confuse other threads that might also be making function calls and checking <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>. In other words, race conditions would result. Therefore, in threaded programs, each thread has its own <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> value. On Linux, a thread-specific <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> is achieved in a similar manner to most other UNIX implementations: <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>
 is defined as a macro that expands into a function call returning a 
modifiable lvalue that is distinct for each thread. (Since the lvalue is
 modifiable, it is still possible to write assignment statements of the 
form <span class="docEmphasis">errno = value</span> in threaded programs.)</p><p class="docText">To summarize, the <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> mechanism has been adapted for threads in a manner that leaves error reporting unchanged from the traditional UNIX API.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The original POSIX.1 standard followed K&amp;R C usage in allowing a program to declare <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> as <span class="docEmphasis">extern int errno</span>.
 SUSv3 doesn’t permit this usage (the change actually occurred in 1995 
in POSIX.1c). Nowadays, a program is required to declare <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> by including <tt>&lt;errno.h&gt;</tt>, which enables the implementation of a per-thread <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EDAEK">29.2.1.3. Return value from Pthreads functions</h5><p class="docText">The
 traditional method of returning status from system calls and some 
library functions is to return 0 on success and -1 on error, with <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>
 being set to indicate the error. The functions in the Pthreads API do 
things differently. All Pthreads functions return 0 on success or a 
positive value on failure. The failure value is one of the same values 
that can be placed in <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> by traditional UNIX system calls.</p><p class="docText">Because each reference to <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>
 in a threaded program carries the overhead of a function call, our 
example programs don’t directly assign the return value of a Pthreads 
function to <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>. Instead, we use an intermediate variable and employ our <span class="docEmphasis">errExitEN()</span> diagnostic function (Section 3.5.2), like so:</p><pre>pthread_t *thread;
int s;

s = pthread_create(&amp;thread, NULL, func, &amp;arg);
if (s != 0)
    errExitEN(s, "pthread_create");</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E4AEK">29.2.1.4. Compiling Pthreads programs</h5><p class="docText">On Linux, programs that use the Pthreads API must be compiled with the <span class="docEmphasis">cc -pthread</span> option. The effects of this option include the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <tt>_REENTRANT</tt> preprocessor macro is defined. This causes the declarations of a few reentrant functions to be exposed.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The program is linked with the <span class="docEmphasis">libpthread</span> library (the equivalent of <span class="docEmphasis">-lpthread</span>).</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The
 precise options for compiling a multithreaded program vary across 
implementations (and compilers). Some other implementations (e.g., 
Tru64) also use <span class="docEmphasis">cc -pthread</span>; Solaris and HP-UX use <span class="docEmphasis">cc -mt</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
