<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>29.3. Thread Creation</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">29.3. Thread Creation</h3><p class="docText">When a program is started, the resulting process consists of a single thread, called the <span class="docEmphasis">initial</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">main</span> thread. In this section, we look at how to create additional threads.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_create()</span> function creates a new thread.</p><pre>#include &lt;pthread.h&gt;

int <b>pthread_create</b>(pthread_t *<span class="docEmphasis">thread</span>, const pthread_attr_t *<span class="docEmphasis">attr</span>,
                   void *(*<span class="docEmphasis">start</span>)(void *), void *<span class="docEmphasis">arg</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or a positive error number on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The new thread commences execution by calling the function identified by <span class="docEmphasis">start</span> with the argument <span class="docEmphasis">arg</span> (i.e., <span class="docEmphasis">start(arg)</span>). The thread that calls <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_create()</span> continues execution with the next statement that follows the call. (This behavior is the same as the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> wrapper function for the <span class="docEmphasis">clone()</span> system call described in Section 28.2.)</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">arg</span> argument is declared as <span class="docEmphasis">void *</span>, meaning that we can pass a pointer to any type of object to the <span class="docEmphasis">start</span> function. Typically, <span class="docEmphasis">arg</span> points to a global or heap variable, but it can also be specified as <tt>NULL</tt>. If we need to pass multiple arguments to <span class="docEmphasis">start</span>, then <span class="docEmphasis">arg</span>
 can be specified as a pointer to a structure containing the arguments 
as separate fields. With judicious casting, we can even specify <span class="docEmphasis">arg</span> as an <span class="docEmphasis">int</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Strictly speaking, the C standards don’t define the results of casting <span class="docEmphasis">int</span> to <span class="docEmphasis">void</span> * and vice versa. However, most C compilers permit these operations, and they produce the desired result; that is, <span class="docEmphasis">int j == (int) ((void *) j)</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The return value of <span class="docEmphasis">start</span> is likewise of type <span class="docEmphasis">void *</span>, and it can be employed in the same way as the <span class="docEmphasis">arg</span> argument. We’ll see how this value is used when we describe the <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_join()</span> function below.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Caution is required when using a cast integer as the return value of a thread’s start function. The reason for this is that <tt>PTHREAD_CANCELED</tt>, the value returned when a thread is canceled (see Chapter 32), is usually some implementation-defined integer value cast to <span class="docEmphasis">void *</span>. If a thread’s start function returns the same integer value, then, to another thread that is doing a <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_join()</span>,
 it will wrongly appear that the thread was canceled. In an application 
that employs thread cancellation and chooses to return cast integer 
values from a thread’s start functions, we must ensure that a normally 
terminating thread does not return an integer whose value matches <tt>PTHREAD_CANCELED</tt>
 on that Pthreads implementation. A portable application would need to 
ensure that normally terminating threads don’t return integer values 
that match <tt>PTHREAD_CANCELED</tt> on any of the implementations on which the application is to run.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">thread</span> argument points to a buffer of type <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_t</span> into which the unique identifier for this thread is copied before <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_create()</span> returns. This identifier can be used in later Pthreads calls to refer to the thread.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">SUSv3 explicitly notes that the implementation need not initialize the buffer pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">thread</span> before the new thread starts executing; that is, the new thread may start running before <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_create()</span> returns to its caller. If the new thread needs to obtain its own ID, then it must do so using <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_self()</span> (described in Section 29.5).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">attr</span> argument is a pointer to a <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_attr_t</span> object that specifies various attributes for the new thread. We say some more about these attributes in Section 29.8. If <span class="docEmphasis">attr</span> is specified as <tt>NULL</tt>,
 then the thread is created with various default attributes, and this is
 what we’ll do in most of the example programs in this book.</p><p class="docText">After a call to <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_create()</span>,
 a program has no guarantees about which thread will next be scheduled 
to use the CPU (on a multiprocessor system, both threads may 
simultaneously execute on different CPUs). Programs that implicitly rely
 on a particular order of scheduling are open to the same sorts of race 
conditions that we described in Section 24.4. If we need to enforce a 
particular order of execution, we must use one of the synchronization 
techniques described in Chapter 30.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
