<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>29.4. Thread Termination</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">29.4. Thread Termination</h3><p class="docText">The execution of a thread terminates in one of the following ways:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The thread’s start function performs a <tt>return</tt> specifying a return value for the thread.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The thread calls <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_exit()</span> (described below).</p></li><li><p class="docList">The thread is canceled using <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cancel()</span> (described in Section 32.1).</p></li><li><p class="docList">Any of the threads calls <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>, or the main thread performs a <tt>return</tt> (in the <span class="docEmphasis">main()</span> function), which causes all threads in the process to terminate immediately.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_exit()</span> function terminates the calling thread, and specifies a return value that can be obtained in another thread by calling <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_join()</span>.</p><pre>include &lt;pthread.h&gt;

void <b>pthread_exit</b>(void *<span class="docEmphasis">retval</span>);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Calling <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_exit()</span> is equivalent to performing a <tt>return</tt> in the thread’s start function, with the difference that <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_exit()</span> can be called from any function that has been called by the thread’s start function.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">retval</span> argument specifies the return value for the thread. The value pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">retval</span>
 should not be located on the thread’s stack, since the contents of that
 stack become undefined on thread termination. (For example, that region
 of the process’s virtual memory might be immediately reused by the 
stack for a new thread.) The same statement applies to the value given 
to a return statement in the thread’s start function.</p><p class="docText">If the main thread calls <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_exit()</span> instead of calling <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span> or performing a <tt>return</tt>, then the other threads continue to execute.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
