<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>29.5. Thread IDs</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">29.5. Thread IDs</h3><p class="docText">Each thread within a process is uniquely identified by a thread ID. This ID is returned to the caller of <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_create()</span>, and a thread can obtain its own ID using <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_self()</span>.</p><pre>include &lt;pthread.h&gt;

pthread_t <b>pthread_self</b>(void);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns the thread ID of the calling thread</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Thread IDs are useful within applications for the following reasons:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Various Pthreads functions use thread IDs to identify the thread on which they are to act. Examples of such functions include <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_join()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_detach()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cancel()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_kill()</span>, all of which we describe in this and the following chapters.</p></li><li><p class="docList">In
 some applications, it can be useful to tag dynamic data structures with
 the ID of a particular thread. This can serve to identify the thread 
that created or “owns” a data structure, or can be used by one thread to
 identify a specific thread that should subsequently do something with 
that data structure.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_equal()</span> function allows us check whether two thread IDs are the same.</p><pre>include &lt;pthread.h&gt;

int <b>pthread_equal</b>(pthread_t <span class="docEmphasis">t1</span>, pthread_t <span class="docEmphasis">t2</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns nonzero value if <span class="docEmphasis">t1</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">t2</span> are equal, otherwise 0</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">For example, to check if the ID of the calling thread matches a thread ID saved in the variable <span class="docEmphasis">tid</span>, we could write the following:</p><pre>if (pthread_equal(tid, pthread_self())
    printf("tid matches self\n");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_equal()</span> function is needed because the <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_t</span> data type must be treated as opaque data. On Linux, <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_t</span> happens to be defined as an <span class="docEmphasis">unsigned long</span>, but on other implementations, it could be a pointer or a structure.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In NPTL, <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_t</span> is actually a pointer that has been cast to <span class="docEmphasis">unsigned long</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">SUSv3 doesn’t require <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_t</span>
 to be implemented as a scalar type; it could be a structure. Therefore,
 we can’t portably use code such as the following to display a thread ID
 (though it does work on many implementations, including Linux, and is 
sometimes useful for debugging purposes):</p><pre>pthread_t thr;

printf("Thread ID = %ld\n", (long) thr);        /* WRONG! */</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In the Linux threading 
implementations, thread IDs are unique across processes. However, this 
is not necessarily the case on other implementations, and SUSv3 
explicitly notes that an application can’t portably use a thread ID to 
identify a thread in another process. SUSv3 also notes that an 
implementation is permitted to reuse a thread ID after a terminated 
thread has been joined with <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_join()</span> or after a detached thread has terminated. (We explain <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_join()</span> in the next section, and detached threads in Section 29.7.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">POSIX thread IDs are not the same as the thread IDs returned by the Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">gettid()</span> system call. POSIX thread IDs are assigned and maintained by the threading implementation. The thread ID returned by <span class="docEmphasis">gettid()</span>
 is a number (similar to a process ID) that is assigned by the kernel. 
Although each POSIX thread has a unique kernel thread ID in the Linux 
NPTL threading implementation, an application generally doesn’t need to 
know about the kernel IDs (and won’t be portable if it depends on 
knowing them).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
