<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>29.6. Joining with a Terminated Thread</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">29.6. Joining with a Terminated Thread</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_join()</span> function waits for the thread identified by <span class="docEmphasis">thread</span> to terminate. (If that thread has already terminated, <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_join()</span> returns immediately.) This operation is termed <span class="docEmphasis">joining</span>.</p><pre>include &lt;pthread.h&gt;

int <b>pthread_join</b>(pthread_t <span class="docEmphasis">thread</span>, void **<span class="docEmphasis">retval</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or a positive error number on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If <span class="docEmphasis">retval</span> is a non-<tt>NULL</tt>
 pointer, then it receives a copy of the terminated thread’s return 
value—that is, the value that was specified when the thread performed a <tt>return</tt> or called <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_exit()</span>.</p><p class="docText">Calling <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_join()</span>
 for a thread ID that has been previously joined can lead to 
unpredictable behavior; for example, it might instead join with a thread
 created later that happened to reuse the same thread ID.</p><p class="docText">If a thread is not detached (see Section 29.7), then we must join with it using <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_join()</span>. If we fail to do this, then, when the thread terminates, it produces the thread equivalent of a zombie process (Section 26.2). Aside from wasting system resources, if enough thread zombies accumulate, we won’t be able to create additional threads.</p><p class="docText">The task that <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_join()</span> performs for threads is similar to that performed by <span class="docEmphasis">waitpid()</span> for processes. However, there are some notable differences:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Threads are peers. Any thread in a process can use <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_join()</span>
 to join with any other thread in the process. For example, if thread A 
creates thread B, which creates thread C, then it is possible for thread
 A to join with thread C, or vice versa. This differs from the 
hierarchical relationship between processes. When a parent process 
creates a child using <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, it is the only process that can <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span> on that child. There is no such relationship between the thread that calls <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_create()</span> and the resulting new thread.</p></li><li><p class="docList">There is no way of saying “join with any thread” (for processes, we can do this using the call <span class="docEmphasis">waitpid(-1, &amp;status, options)</span>); nor is there a way to do a nonblocking join (analogous to the <span class="docEmphasis">waitpid()</span> <tt>WNOHANG</tt> flag). There are ways to achieve similar functionality using condition variables; we show an example in Section 30.2.4.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The limitation that <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_join()</span>
 can join only with a specific thread ID is intentional. The idea is 
that a program should join only with the threads that it “knows” about. 
The problem with a “join with any thread” operation stems from the fact 
that there is no hierarchy of threads, so such an operation could indeed
 join with <span class="docEmphasis">any</span> thread, including one that was privately created by a library function. (The condition-variable technique that we show in Section 30.2.4
 allows a thread to join only with any other thread that it knows 
about.) As a consequence, the library would no longer be able to join 
with that thread in order to obtain its status, and it would erroneously
 try to join with a thread ID that had already been joined. In other 
words, a “join with any thread” operation is incompatible with modular 
program design.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EBAEK">29.6.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EFAEK">29.6.1.1. Example program</h5><p class="docText">The program in Example 29-1 creates another thread and then joins with it.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E1AEK">Example 29-1. A simple program using Pthreads</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>threads/simple_thread.c</b>
#include &lt;pthread.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

static void *
threadFunc(void *arg)
{
    char *s = (char *) arg;

    printf("%s", s);

    return (void *) strlen(s);
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    pthread_t t1;
    void *res;
    int s;

    s = pthread_create(&amp;t1, NULL, threadFunc, "Hello world\n");
    if (s != 0)
        errExitEN(s, "pthread_create");

    printf("Message from main()\n");
    s = pthread_join(t1, &amp;res);
    if (s != 0)
        errExitEN(s, "pthread_join");

    printf("Thread returned %ld\n", (long) res);

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
      <b>threads/simple_thread.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">When we run the program in Example 29-1, we see the following:</p><pre>$ <b>./simple_thread</b>
Message from main()
Hello world
Thread returned 12</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Depending on how the two threads were scheduled, the order of the first two lines of output might be reversed.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
