<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>29.9. Threads Versus Processes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">29.9. Threads Versus Processes</h3><p class="docText">In
 this section, we briefly consider some of the factors that might 
influence our choice of whether to implement an application as a group 
of threads or as a group of processes. We begin by considering the 
advantages of a multithreaded approach:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Sharing
 data between threads is easy. By contrast, sharing data between 
processes requires more work (e.g., creating a shared memory segment or 
using a pipe).</p></li><li><p class="docList">Thread creation is faster than process creation; context-switch time may be lower for threads than for processes.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Using threads can have some disadvantages compared to using processes:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">When
 programming with threads, we need to ensure that the functions we call 
are thread-safe or are called in a thread-safe manner. (We describe the 
concept of thread safety in Section 31.1.) Multiprocess applications 
don’t need to be concerned with this.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A
 bug in one thread (e.g., modifying memory via an incorrect pointer) can
 damage all of the threads in the process, since they share the same 
address space and other attributes. By contrast, processes are more 
isolated from one another.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Each
 thread is competing for use of the finite virtual address space of the 
host process. In particular, each thread’s stack and thread-specific 
data (or thread-local storage) consumes a part of the process virtual 
address space, which is consequently unavailable for other threads. 
Although the available virtual address space is large (e.g., typically 3
 GB on x86-32), this factor may be a significant limitation for 
processes employing large numbers of threads or threads that require 
large amounts of memory. By contrast, separate processes can each employ
 the full range of available virtual memory (subject to the limitations 
of RAM and swap space).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The following are some other points that may influence our choice of threads versus processes:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Dealing
 with signals in a multithreaded application requires careful design. 
(As a general principle, it is usually desirable to avoid the use of 
signals in multithreaded programs.) We say more about threads and 
signals in Section 33.2.</p></li><li><p class="docList">In
 a multithreaded application, all threads must be running the same 
program (although perhaps in different functions). In a multiprocess 
application, different processes can run different programs.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Aside
 from data, threads also share certain other information (e.g., file 
descriptors, signal dispositions, current working directory, and user 
and group IDs). This may be an advantage or a disadvantage, depending on
 the application.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
