<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>29.10. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">29.10. Summary</h3><p class="docText">In
 a multithreaded process, multiple threads are concurrently executing 
the same program. All of the threads share the same global and heap 
variables, but each thread has a private stack for local variables. The 
threads in a process also share a number of other attributes, including 
process ID, open file descriptors, signal dispositions, current working 
directory, and resource limits.</p><p class="docText">The
 key difference between threads and processes is the easier sharing of 
information that threads provide, and this is the main reason that some 
application designs map better onto a multithread design than onto a 
multiprocess design. Threads can also provide better performance for 
some operations (e.g., thread creation is faster than process creation),
 but this factor is usually secondary in influencing the choice of 
threads versus processes.</p><p class="docText">Threads are created using <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_create()</span>. Each thread can then independently terminate using <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_exit()</span>. (If any thread calls <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>, then all threads immediately terminate.) Unless a thread has been marked as detached (e.g., via a call to <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_detach()</span>), it must be joined by another thread using <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_join()</span>, which returns the termination status of the joined thread.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E46DK">29.10.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EBAEK">29.10.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">[Butenhof,
 1996] provides an exposition of Pthreads that is both readable and 
thorough. [Robbins &amp; Robbins, 2003] also provides good coverage of 
Pthreads. [Tanenbaum, 2007] provides a more theoretical introduction to 
thread concepts, covering topics such as mutexes, critical regions, 
conditional variables, and deadlock detection and avoidance. [Vahalia, 
1996] provides background on the implementation of threads.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
