<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>30.2. Signaling Changes of State: Condition Variables</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">30.2. Signaling Changes of State: Condition Variables</h3><p class="docText">A
 mutex prevents multiple threads from accessing a shared variable at the
 same time. A condition variable allows one thread to inform other 
threads about changes in the state of a shared variable (or other shared
 resource) and allows the other threads to wait (block) for such 
notification.</p><p class="docText">A
 simple example that doesn’t use condition variables serves to 
demonstrate why they are useful. Suppose that we have a number of 
threads that produce some “result units” that are consumed by the main 
thread, and that we use a mutex-protected variable, <span class="docEmphasis">avail</span>, to represent the number of produced units awaiting consumption:</p><pre>static pthread_mutex_t mtx = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER;

static int avail = 0;</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The code segments shown in this section can be found in the file <tt>threads/prod_no_condvar.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">In the producer threads, we would have code such as the following:</p><pre>/* Code to produce a unit omitted */

s = pthread_mutex_lock(&amp;mtx);
if (s != 0)
    errExitEN(s, "pthread_mutex_lock");

avail++;    /* Let consumer know another unit is available */

s = pthread_mutex_unlock(&amp;mtx);
if (s != 0)
    errExitEN(s, "pthread_mutex_unlock");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">And in the main (consumer) thread, we could employ the following code:</p><pre>for (;;) {
    s = pthread_mutex_lock(&amp;mtx);
    if (s != 0)
        errExitEN(s, "pthread_mutex_lock");

    while (avail &gt; 0) {         /* Consume all available units */
        /* Do something with produced unit */
        avail--;
    }

    s = pthread_mutex_unlock(&amp;mtx);
    if (s != 0)
        errExitEN(s, "pthread_mutex_unlock");
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The above code works, but it wastes CPU time, because the main thread continually loops, checking the state of the variable <span class="docEmphasis">avail</span>. A <span class="docEmphasis">condition variable</span>
 remedies this problem. It allows a thread to sleep (wait) until another
 thread notifies (signals) it that it must do something (i.e., that some
 “condition” has arisen that the sleeper must now respond to).</p><p class="docText">A
 condition variable is always used in conjunction with a mutex. The 
mutex provides mutual exclusion for accessing the shared variable, while
 the condition variable is used to signal changes in the variable’s 
state. (The use of the term <span class="docEmphasis">signal</span> here has nothing to do with the signals described in Chapter 20 to Chapter 22; rather, it is used in the sense of <span class="docEmphasis">indicate</span>.)</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6HEK">30.2.1. Statically Allocated Condition Variables</h4><p class="docText">As
 with mutexes, condition variables can be allocated statically or 
dynamically. We defer discussion of dynamically allocated condition 
variables until Section 30.2.5, and consider statically allocated condition variables here.</p><p class="docText">A condition variable has the type <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_t</span>.
 As with a mutex, a condition variable must be initialized before use. 
For a statically allocated condition variable, this is done by assigning
 it the value <tt>PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER</tt>, as in the following example:</p><pre>pthread_cond_t cond = PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER;</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">According to SUSv3, applying the operations that we describe in the remainder of this section to a <span class="docEmphasis">copy</span>
 of a condition variable yields results that are undefined. Operations 
should always be performed only on the original condition variable that 
has been statically initialized using <tt>PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER</tt> or dynamically initialized using <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_init()</span> (described in Section 30.2.5).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6JEK">30.2.2. Signaling and Waiting on Condition Variables</h4><p class="docText">The principal condition variable operations are <span class="docEmphasis">signal</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">wait</span>.
 The signal operation is a notification to one or more waiting threads 
that a shared variable’s state has changed. The wait operation is the 
means of blocking until such a notification is received.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_signal()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_broadcast()</span> functions both signal the condition variable specified by <span class="docEmphasis">cond</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_wait()</span> function blocks a thread until the condition variable <span class="docEmphasis">cond</span> is signaled.</p><pre>#include &lt;pthread.h&gt;

int <b>pthread_cond_signal</b>(pthread_cond_t *<span class="docEmphasis">cond</span>);
int <b>pthread_cond_broadcast</b>(pthread_cond_t *<span class="docEmphasis">cond</span>);
int <b>pthread_cond_wait</b>(pthread_cond_t *<span class="docEmphasis">cond</span>, pthread_mutex_t *<span class="docEmphasis">mutex</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">All return 0 on success, or a positive error number on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The difference between <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_signal()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_broadcast()</span> lies in what happens if multiple threads are blocked in <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_wait()</span>. With <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_signal()</span>, we are simply guaranteed that at least one of the blocked threads is woken up; with <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_broadcast()</span>, all blocked threads are woken up.</p><p class="docText">Using <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_broadcast()</span> always yields correct results (since all threads should be programmed to handle redundant and spurious wake-ups), but <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_signal()</span> can be more efficient. However, <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_signal()</span>
 should be used only if just one of the waiting threads needs to be 
woken up to handle the change in state of the shared variable, and it 
doesn’t matter which one of the waiting threads is woken up. This 
scenario typically applies when all of the waiting threads are designed 
to perform the exactly same task. Given these assumptions, <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_signal()</span> can be more efficient than <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_broadcast()</span>, because it avoids the following possibility:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">All waiting threads are awoken.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">One
 thread is scheduled first. This thread checks the state of the shared 
variable(s) (under protection of the associated mutex) and sees that 
there is work to be done. The thread performs the required work, changes
 the state of the shared variable(s) to indicate that the work has been 
done, and unlocks the associated mutex.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Each
 of the remaining threads in turn locks the mutex and tests the state of
 the shared variable. However, because of the change made by the first 
thread, these threads see that there is no work to be done, and so 
unlock the mutex and go back to sleep (i.e., call <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_wait()</span> once more).</p></div></li></ol></div><p class="docText">By contrast, <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_broadcast()</span>
 handles the case where the waiting threads are designed to perform 
different tasks (in which case they probably have different predicates 
associated with the condition variable).</p><p class="docText">A
 condition variable holds no state information. It is simply a mechanism
 for communicating information about the application’s state. If no 
thread is waiting on the condition variable at the time that it is 
signaled, then the signal is lost. A thread that later waits on the 
condition variable will unblock only when the variable is signaled once 
more.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_timedwait()</span> function is the same as <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_wait()</span>, except that the <span class="docEmphasis">abstime</span>
 argument specifies an upper limit on the time that the thread will 
sleep while waiting for the condition variable to be signaled.</p><pre>#include &lt;pthread.h&gt;

int <b>pthread_cond_timedwait</b>(pthread_cond_t *<span class="docEmphasis">cond</span>, pthread_mutex_t *<span class="docEmphasis">mutex</span>,
                           const struct timespec *<span class="docEmphasis">abstime</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or a positive error number on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">abstime</span> argument is a <span class="docEmphasis">timespec</span> structure (Section 23.4.2) specifying an absolute time expressed as seconds and nanoseconds since the Epoch (Section 10.1). If the time interval specified by <span class="docEmphasis">abstime</span> expires without the condition variable being signaled, then <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_timedwait()</span> returns the error <tt>ETIMEDOUT</tt>.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EDQEK">30.2.2.1. Using a condition variable in the producer-consumer example</h5><p class="docText">Let’s
 revise our previous example to use a condition variable. The 
declarations of our global variable and associated mutex and condition 
variable are as follows:</p><pre>static pthread_mutex_t mtx = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER;
static pthread_cond_t cond = PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER;

static int avail = 0;</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The code segments shown in this section can be found in the file <tt>threads/prod_condvar.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The code in the producer threads is the same as before, except that we add a call to <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_signal()</span>:</p><pre>s = pthread_mutex_lock(&amp;mtx);
if (s != 0)
    errExitEN(s, "pthread_mutex_lock");

avail++;                /* Let consumer know another unit is available */

s = pthread_mutex_unlock(&amp;mtx);
if (s != 0)
    errExitEN(s, "pthread_mutex_unlock");

s = pthread_cond_signal(&amp;cond);         /* Wake sleeping consumer */
if (s != 0)
    errExitEN(s, "pthread_cond_signal");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Before considering the code of the consumer, we need to explain <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_wait()</span>
 in greater detail. We noted earlier that a condition variable always 
has an associated mutex. Both of these objects are passed as arguments 
to <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_wait()</span>, which performs the following steps:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">unlock the mutex specified by <span class="docEmphasis">mutex</span>;</p></li><li><p class="docList">block the calling thread until another thread signals the condition variable <span class="docEmphasis">cond</span>; and</p></li><li><p class="docList">relock <span class="docEmphasis">mutex</span>.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_wait()</span> function is designed to perform these steps because, normally, we access a shared variable in the following manner:</p><pre>s = pthread_mutex_lock(&amp;mtx);
if (s != 0)
    errExitEN(s, "pthread_mutex_lock");

while (/* Check that shared variable is not in state we want */)
    pthread_cond_wait(&amp;cond, &amp;mtx);

/* Now shared variable is in desired state; do some work */

s = pthread_mutex_unlock(&amp;mtx);
if (s != 0)
    errExitEN(s, "pthread_mutex_unlock");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">(We explain why the <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_wait()</span> call is placed within a <tt>while</tt> loop rather than an <tt>if</tt> statement in the next section.)</p><p class="docText">In
 the above code, both accesses to the shared variable must be 
mutex-protected for the reasons that we explained earlier. In other 
words, there is a natural association of a mutex with a condition 
variable:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The thread locks the mutex in preparation for checking the state of the shared variable.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The state of the shared variable is checked.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If
 the shared variable is not in the desired state, then the thread must 
unlock the mutex (so that other threads can access the shared variable) 
before it goes to sleep on the condition variable.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">When
 the thread is reawakened because the condition variable has been 
signaled, the mutex must once more be locked, since, typically, the 
thread then immediately accesses the shared variable.</p></div></li></ol></div><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_wait()</span>
 function automatically performs the mutex unlocking and locking 
required in the last two of these steps. In the third step, releasing 
the mutex and blocking on the condition variable are performed 
atomically. In other words, it is not possible for some other thread to 
acquire the mutex and signal the condition variable before the thread 
calling <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_wait()</span> has blocked on the condition variable.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">There
 is a corollary to the observation that there is a natural relationship 
between a condition variable and a mutex: all threads that concurrently 
wait on a particular condition variable must specify the same mutex in 
their <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_wait()</span> (or <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_timedwait()</span>) calls. In effect, a <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_wait()</span>
 call dynamically binds a condition variable to a unique mutex for the 
duration of the call. SUSv3 notes that the result of using more than one
 mutex for concurrent <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_wait()</span> calls on the same condition variable is undefined.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Putting the above details together, we can now modify the main (consumer) thread to use <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_wait()</span>, as follows:</p><pre>for (;;) {
    s = pthread_mutex_lock(&amp;mtx);
    if (s != 0)
        errExitEN(s, "pthread_mutex_lock");

    while (avail == 0) {            /* Wait for something to consume */
        s = pthread_cond_wait(&amp;cond, &amp;mtx);
        if (s != 0)
            errExitEN(s, "pthread_cond_wait");
    }

    while (avail &gt; 0) {             /* Consume all available units */
        /* Do something with produced unit */
        avail--;
    }

    s = pthread_mutex_unlock(&amp;mtx);
    if (s != 0)
        errExitEN(s, "pthread_mutex_unlock");

    /* Perhaps do other work here that doesn’t require mutex lock */
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We conclude with one final observation about the use of <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_signal()</span> (and <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_broadcast()</span>). In the producer code shown earlier, we called <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_mutex_unlock()</span>, and then called <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_signal()</span>;
 that is, we first unlocked the mutex associated with the shared 
variable, and then signaled the corresponding condition variable. We 
could have reversed these two steps; SUSv3 permits them to be done in 
either order.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">[Butenhof,
 1996] points out that, on some implementations, unlocking the mutex and
 then signaling the condition variable may yield better performance than
 performing these steps in the reverse sequence. If the mutex is 
unlocked only after the condition variable is signaled, the thread 
performing <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_wait()</span>
 may wake up while the mutex is still locked, and then immediately go 
back to sleep again when it finds that the mutex is locked. This results
 in two superfluous context switches. Some implementations eliminate 
this problem by employing a technique called <span class="docEmphasis">wait morphing</span>,
 which moves the signaled thread from the condition variable wait queue 
to the mutex wait queue without performing a context switch if the mutex
 is locked.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERVEK">30.2.3. Testing a Condition Variable’s Predicate</h4><p class="docText">Each
 condition variable has an associated predicate involving one or more 
shared variables. For example, in the code segment in the preceding 
section, the predicate associated with <span class="docEmphasis">cond</span> is <span class="docEmphasis">(avail == 0)</span>. This code segment demonstrates a general design principle: a <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_wait()</span> call must be governed by a <tt>while</tt> loop rather than an <tt>if</tt> statement. This is so because, on return from <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_wait()</span>,
 there are no guarantees about the state of the predicate; therefore, we
 should immediately recheck the predicate and resume sleeping if it is 
not in the desired state.</p><p class="docText">We can’t make any assumptions about the state of the predicate upon return from <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_wait()</span>, for the following reasons:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Other threads may be woken up first</span>.
 Perhaps several threads were waiting to acquire the mutex associated 
with the condition variable. Even if the thread that signaled the mutex 
set the predicate to the desired state, it is still possible that 
another thread might acquire the mutex first and change the state of the
 associated shared variable(s), and thus the state of the predicate.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Designing for “loose” predicates may be simpler</span>. Sometimes, it is easier to design applications based on condition variables that indicate <span class="docEmphasis">possibility</span> rather than <span class="docEmphasis">certainty</span>. In other words, signaling a condition variable would mean “there <span class="docEmphasis">may be</span> something” for the signaled thread to do, rather than “there <span class="docEmphasis">is</span>
 something” to do. Using this approach, the condition variable can be 
signaled based on approximations of the predicate’s state, and the 
signaled thread can ascertain if there really is something to do by 
rechecking the predicate.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Spurious wake-ups can occur</span>.
 On some implementations, a thread waiting on a condition variable may 
be woken up even though no other thread actually signaled the condition 
variable. Such spurious wake-ups are a (rare) consequence of the 
techniques required for efficient implementation on some multiprocessor 
systems, and are explicitly permitted by SUSv3.</p></li></ul><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EVXEK">30.2.4. Example Program: Joining Any Terminated Thread</h4><p class="docText">We noted earlier that <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_join()</span> can be used to join with only a specific thread. It provides no mechanism for joining with <span class="docEmphasis">any</span> terminated thread. We now show how a condition variable can be used to circumvent this restriction.</p><p class="docText">The program in Example 30-4
 creates one thread for each of its command-line arguments. Each thread 
sleeps for the number of seconds specified in the corresponding 
command-line argument and then terminates. The sleep interval is our 
means of simulating the idea of a thread that does work for a period of 
time.</p><p class="docText">The 
program maintains a set of global variables recording information about 
all of the threads that have been created. For each thread, an element 
in the global <span class="docEmphasis">thread</span> array records the ID of the thread (the <span class="docEmphasis">tid</span> field) and its current state (the <span class="docEmphasis">state</span> field). The <span class="docEmphasis">state</span> field has one of the following values: <tt>TS_ALIVE</tt>, meaning the thread is alive; <tt>TS_TERMINATED</tt>, meaning the thread has terminated but not yet been joined; or <tt>TS_JOINED</tt>, meaning the thread has terminated and been joined.</p><p class="docText">As each thread terminates, it assigns the value <tt>TS_TERMINATED</tt> to the <span class="docEmphasis">state</span> field for its element in the <span class="docEmphasis">thread</span> array, increments a global counter of terminated but as yet unjoined threads (<span class="docEmphasis">numUnjoined</span>), and signals the condition variable <span class="docEmphasis">threadDied</span>.</p><p class="docText">The main thread employs a loop that continuously waits on the condition variable <span class="docEmphasis">threadDied</span>. Whenever <span class="docEmphasis">threadDied</span> is signaled and there are terminated threads that have not been joined, the main thread scans the <span class="docEmphasis">thread</span> array, looking for elements with <span class="docEmphasis">state</span> set to <tt>TS_TERMINATED</tt>. For each thread in this state, <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_join()</span> is called using the corresponding <span class="docEmphasis">tid</span> field from the <span class="docEmphasis">thread</span> array, and then the <span class="docEmphasis">state</span> is set to <tt>TS_JOINED</tt>. The main loop terminates when all of the threads created by the main thread have died—that is, when the global variable <span class="docEmphasis">numLive</span> is 0.</p><p class="docText">The following shell session log demonstrates the use of the program in Example 30-4:</p><pre>$ <b>./thread_multijoin 1 1 2 3 3 </b>              <i> Create 5 threads</i>
Thread 0 terminating
Thread 1 terminating
Reaped thread 0 (numLive=4)
Reaped thread 1 (numLive=3)
Thread 2 terminating
Reaped thread 2 (numLive=2)
Thread 3 terminating
Thread 4 terminating
Reaped thread 3 (numLive=1)
Reaped thread 4 (numLive=0)</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Finally, note that although
 the threads in the example program are created as joinable and are 
immediately reaped on termination using <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_join()</span>,
 we don’t need to use this approach in order to find out about thread 
termination. We could have made the threads detached, removed the use of
 <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_join()</span>, and simply used the <span class="docEmphasis">thread</span> array (and associated global variables) as the means of recording the termination of each thread.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EV2EK">Example 30-4. A main thread that can join with any terminated thread</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>threads/thread_multijoin.c</b>
#include &lt;pthread.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

static pthread_cond_t threadDied = PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER;
static pthread_mutex_t threadMutex = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER;
                /* Protects all of the following global variables */

static int totThreads = 0;      /* Total number of threads created */
static int numLive = 0;         /* Total number of threads still alive or
                                   terminated but not yet joined */
static int numUnjoined = 0;     /* Number of terminated threads that
                                   have not yet been joined */
enum tstate {                   /* Thread states */
    TS_ALIVE,                   /* Thread is alive */
    TS_TERMINATED,              /* Thread terminated, not yet joined */
    TS_JOINED                   /* Thread terminated, and joined */
};

static struct {                 /* Info about each thread */
    pthread_t tid;              /* ID of this thread */
    enum tstate state;          /* Thread state (TS_* constants above) */
    int sleepTime;              /* Number seconds to live before terminating */
} *thread;

static void *                   /* Start function for thread */
threadFunc(void *arg)
{
    int idx = *((int *) arg);
    int s;

    sleep(thread[idx].sleepTime);       /* Simulate doing some work */
    printf("Thread %d terminating\n", idx);

    s = pthread_mutex_lock(&amp;threadMutex);
    if (s != 0)
        errExitEN(s, "pthread_mutex_lock");

    numUnjoined++;
    thread[idx].state = TS_TERMINATED;

    s = pthread_mutex_unlock(&amp;threadMutex);
    if (s != 0)
        errExitEN(s, "pthread_mutex_unlock");
    s = pthread_cond_signal(&amp;threadDied);
    if (s != 0)
        errExitEN(s, "pthread_cond_signal");

    return NULL;
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int s, idx;

    if (argc &lt; 2 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s nsecs...\n", argv[0]);

    thread = calloc(argc - 1, sizeof(*thread));
    if (thread == NULL)
        errExit("calloc");

    /* Create all threads */

    for (idx = 0; idx &lt; argc - 1; idx++) {
        thread[idx].sleepTime = getInt(argv[idx + 1], GN_NONNEG, NULL);
        thread[idx].state = TS_ALIVE;
        s = pthread_create(&amp;thread[idx].tid, NULL, threadFunc, &amp;idx);
        if (s != 0)
            errExitEN(s, "pthread_create");
    }

    totThreads = argc - 1;
    numLive = totThreads;

    /* Join with terminated threads */

    while (numLive &gt; 0) {
        s = pthread_mutex_lock(&amp;threadMutex);
        if (s != 0)
            errExitEN(s, "pthread_mutex_lock");

        while (numUnjoined == 0) {
            s = pthread_cond_wait(&amp;threadDied, &amp;threadMutex);
            if (s != 0)
                errExitEN(s, "pthread_cond_wait");
        }

        for (idx = 0; idx &lt; totThreads; idx++) {
            if (thread[idx].state == TS_TERMINATED){
                s = pthread_join(thread[idx].tid, NULL);
                if (s != 0)
                    errExitEN(s, "pthread_join");

                thread[idx].state = TS_JOINED;
                numLive--;
                numUnjoined--;

                printf("Reaped thread %d (numLive=%d)\n", idx, numLive);
            }
        }

        s = pthread_mutex_unlock(&amp;threadMutex);
        if (s != 0)
            errExitEN(s, "pthread_mutex_unlock");
    }

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
      <b>threads/thread_multijoin.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EA3EK">30.2.5. Dynamically Allocated Condition Variables</h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_init()</span> function is used to dynamically initialize a condition variable. The circumstances in which we need to use <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_init()</span> are analogous to those where <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_mutex_init()</span> is needed to dynamically initialize a mutex (Section 30.1.5); that is, we must use <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_init()</span>
 to initialize automatically and dynamically allocated condition 
variables, and to initialize a statically allocated condition variable 
with attributes other than the defaults.</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">#include &lt;pthread.h&gt;

int <b>pthread_cond_init</b>(pthread_cond_t *<span class="docEmphasis">cond</span>, const pthread_condattr_t *<span class="docEmphasis">attr</span>);

					  </pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or a positive error number on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">cond</span> argument identifies the condition variable to be initialized. As with mutexes, we can specify an <span class="docEmphasis">attr</span>
 argument that has been previously initialized to determine attributes 
for the condition variable. Various Pthreads functions can be used to 
initialize the attributes in the <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_condattr_t</span> object pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">attr</span>. If <span class="docEmphasis">attr</span> is <tt>NULL</tt>, a default set of attributes is assigned to the condition variable.</p><p class="docText">SUSv3
 specifies that initializing an already initialized condition variable 
results in undefined behavior; we should not do this.</p><p class="docText">When an automatically or dynamically allocated condition variable is no longer required, then it should be destroyed using <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_destroy()</span>. It is not necessary to call <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_destroy()</span> on a condition variable that was statically initialized using <tt>PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER</tt>.</p><pre>#include &lt;pthread.h&gt;

int <b>pthread_cond_destroy</b>(pthread_cond_t *<span class="docEmphasis">cond</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or a positive error number on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">It
 is safe to destroy a condition variable only when no threads are 
waiting on it. If the condition variable resides in a region of 
dynamically allocated memory, then it should be destroyed before freeing
 that memory region. An automatically allocated condition variable 
should be destroyed before its host function returns.</p><p class="docText">A condition variable that has been destroyed with <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_destroy()</span> can subsequently be reinitialized by <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_init()</span>.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
