<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>30.4. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">30.4. Exercises</h3><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Modify the program in Example 30-1 (<tt>thread_incr.c</tt>) so that each loop in the thread’s start function outputs the current value of <span class="docEmphasis">glob</span>
 and some identifier that uniquely identifies the thread. The unique 
identifier for the thread could be specified as an argument to the <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_create()</span>
 call used to create the thread. For this program, that would require 
changing the argument of the thread’s start function to be a pointer to a
 structure containing the unique identifier and a loop limit value. Run 
the program, redirecting output to a file, and then inspect the file to 
see what happens to <span class="docEmphasis">glob</span> as the kernel scheduler alternates execution between the two threads.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Implement
 a set of thread-safe functions that update and search an unbalanced 
binary tree. This library should include functions (with the obvious 
purposes) of the following form:</p><pre>initialize(tree);
add(tree, char *key, void *value);
delete(tree, char *key)
Boolean lookup(char *key, void **value)</pre><br/>
<p class="docList">In the above prototypes, <span class="docEmphasis">tree</span>
 is a structure that points to the root of the tree (you will need to 
define a suitable structure for this purpose). Each element of the tree 
holds a key-value pair. You will also need to define the structure for 
each element to include a mutex that protects that element so that only 
one thread at a time can access it. The <span class="docEmphasis">initialize()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">add()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">lookup()</span> functions are relatively simple to implement. The <span class="docEmphasis">delete()</span> operation requires a little more effort.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Removing
 the need to maintain a balanced tree greatly simplifies the locking 
requirements of the implementation, but carries the risk that certain 
patterns of input would result in a tree that performs poorly. 
Maintaining a balanced tree necessitates moving nodes between subtrees 
during the <span class="docEmphasis">add()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">delete()</span> operations, which requires much more complex locking strategies.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></div></li></ol></div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
