<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>31.1. Thread Safety (and Reentrancy Revisited)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">31.1. Thread Safety (and Reentrancy Revisited)</h3><p class="docText">A function is said to be <span class="docEmphasis">thread-safe</span>
 if it can safely be invoked by multiple threads at the same time; put 
conversely, if a function is not thread-safe, then we can’t call it from
 one thread while it is being executed in another thread. For example, 
the following function (similar to code that we looked at in Section 30.1) is not thread-safe:</p><pre>static int glob = 0;

static void
incr(int loops)
{
    int loc, j;
    for (j = 0; j &lt; loops; j++) {
     loc = glob;
     loc++;
     glob = loc;
   }
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If multiple threads invoke this function concurrently, the final value in <span class="docEmphasis">glob</span>
 is unpredictable. This function illustrates the typical reason that a 
function is not thread-safe: it employs global or static variables that 
are shared by all threads.</p><p class="docText">There
 are various methods of rendering a function thread-safe. One way is to 
associate a mutex with the function (or perhaps with all of the 
functions in a library, if they all share the same global variables), 
lock that mutex when the function is called, and unlock it when the 
mutex returns. This approach has the virtue of simplicity. On the other 
hand, it means that only one thread at a time can execute the 
function—we say that access to the function is <span class="docEmphasis">serialized</span>.
 If the threads spend a significant amount of time executing this 
function, then this serialization results in a loss of concurrency, 
because the threads of a program can no longer execute in parallel.</p><p class="docText">A
 more sophisticated solution is to associate the mutex with a shared 
variable. We then determine which parts of the function are critical 
sections that access the shared variable, and acquire and release the 
mutex only during the execution of these critical sections. This allows 
multiple threads to execute the function at the same time and to operate
 in parallel, except when more than one thread needs to execute a 
critical section.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EZMEK">31.1.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E4MEK">31.1.1.1. Non-thread-safe functions</h5><p class="docText">To
 facilitate the development of threaded applications, all of the 
functions specified in SUSv3 are required to be implemented in a 
thread-safe manner, except those listed in Table 31-1. (Many of these functions are not discussed in this book.)</p><p class="docText">In addition to the functions listed in Table 31-1, SUSv3 specifies the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">ctermid()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">tmpnam()</span> functions need not be thread-safe if passed a <tt>NULL</tt> argument.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">wcrtomb()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">wcsrtombs()</span> functions need not be thread-safe if their final argument (<span class="docEmphasis">ps</span>) is <tt>NULL</tt>.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">SUSv4 modifies the list of functions in Table 31-1 as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">ecvt()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fcvt()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">gcvt()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyname()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyaddr()</span> are removed, since these functions have been removed from the standard.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">strsignal()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">system()</span> functions are added. The <span class="docEmphasis">system()</span> function is nonreentrant because the manipulations that it must make to signal dispositions have a process-wide effect.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The standards do not prohibit an implementation from making the functions in Table 31-1
 thread-safe. However, even if some of these functions are thread-safe 
on some implementations, a portable application can’t rely on this to be
 the case on all implementations.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 31-1. Functions that SUSv3 does not require to be thread-safe</h5></caption><colgroup span="4"><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">asctime()</span>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">basename()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">catgets()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">crypt()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">ctime()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">dbm_clearerr()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">dbm_close()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">dbm_delete()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">dbm_error()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">dbm_fetch()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">dbm_firstkey()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">dbm_nextkey()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">dbm_open()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">dbm_store()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">dirname()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">dlerror()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">drand48()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">ecvt()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">encrypt()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">endgrent()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">endpwent()</span></p>
<span class="docEmphasis">endutxent()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">fcvt()</span>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">ftw()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">gcvt()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getc_unlocked()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getchar_unlocked()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getdate()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getenv()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getgrent()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getgrgid()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getgrnam()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyaddr()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyname()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">gethostent()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getlogin()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getnetbyaddr()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getnetbyname()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getnetent()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getprotobyname()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getprotobynumber()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getprotoent()</span></p>
<span class="docEmphasis">getpwent()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">getpwnam()</span>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getpwuid()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getservbyname()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getservbyport()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getservent()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getutxent()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getutxid()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getutxline()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">gmtime()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">hcreate()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">hdestroy()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">hsearch()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">inet_ntoa()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">l64a()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">lgamma()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">lgammaf()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">lgammal()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">localeconv()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">localtime()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">lrand48()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">mrand48()</span></p>
<span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">nl_langinfo()</span>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">ptsname()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">putc_unlocked()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">putchar_unlocked()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">putenv()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">pututxline()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">rand()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">readdir()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">setenv()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">setgrent()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">setkey()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">setpwent()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">setutxent()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">strerror()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">strtok()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">ttyname()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">unsetenv()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">wcstombs()</span></p>
<span class="docEmphasis">wctomb()</span></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EYGFK">31.1.1.2. Reentrant and nonreentrant functions</h5><p class="docText">Although
 the use of critical sections to implement thread safety is a 
significant improvement over the use of per-function mutexes, it is 
still somewhat inefficient because there is a cost to locking and 
unlocking a mutex. A <span class="docEmphasis">reentrant function</span>
 achieves thread safety without the use of mutexes. It does this by 
avoiding the use of global and static variables. Any information that 
must be returned to the caller, or maintained between calls to the 
function, is stored in buffers allocated by the caller. (We first 
encountered reentrancy when discussing the treatment of global variables
 within signal handlers in Section 21.1.2.) However, not all functions can be made reentrant. The usual reasons are the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">By their nature, some functions must access global data structures. The functions in the <span class="docEmphasis">malloc</span> library provide a good example. These functions maintain a global linked list of free blocks on the heap. The functions of the <span class="docEmphasis">malloc</span> library are made thread-safe through the use of mutexes.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Some
 functions (defined before the invention of threads) have an interface 
that by definition is nonreentrant, because they return pointers to 
storage statically allocated by the function, or they employ static 
storage to maintain information between successive calls to the same (or
 a related) function. Most of the functions in Table 31-1 fall into this category. For example, the <span class="docEmphasis">asctime()</span> function (Section 10.2.3) returns a pointer to a statically allocated buffer containing a date-time string.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">For
 several of the functions that have nonreentrant interfaces, SUSv3 
specifies reentrant equivalents with names ending with the suffix <span class="docEmphasis">_r</span>.
 These functions require the caller to allocate a buffer whose address 
is then passed to the function and used to return the result. This 
allows the calling thread to use a local (stack) variable for the 
function result buffer. For this purpose, SUSv3 specifies <span class="docEmphasis">asctime_r()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ctime_r()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">getgrgid_r()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">getgrnam_r()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">getlogin_r()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">getpwnam_r()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">getpwuid_r()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">gmtime_r()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">localtime_r()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">rand_r()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">readdir_r()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">strerror_r()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">strtok_r()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">ttyname_r()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Some implementations also provide additional reentrant equivalents of other traditional nonreentrant functions. For example, <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> provides <span class="docEmphasis">crypt_r()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyname_r()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">getservbyname_r()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">getutent_r()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">getutid_r()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">getutline_r()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">ptsname_r()</span>.
 However, a portable application can’t rely on these functions being 
present on other implementations. In some cases, SUSv3 doesn’t specify 
these reentrant equivalents because alternatives to the traditional 
functions exist that are both superior and reentrant. For example, <span class="docEmphasis">getaddrinfo()</span> is the modern, reentrant alternative to <span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyname()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getservbyname()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
