<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>31.2. One-Time Initialization</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">31.2. One-Time Initialization</h3><p class="docText">Sometimes,
 a threaded application needs to ensure that some initialization action 
occurs just once, regardless of how many threads are created. For 
example, a mutex may need to be initialized with special attributes 
using <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_mutex_init()</span>,
 and that initialization must occur just once. If we are creating the 
threads from the main program, then this is generally easy to achieve—we
 perform the initialization before creating any threads that depend on 
the initialization. However, in a library function, this is not 
possible, because the calling program may create the threads before the 
first call to the library function. Therefore, the library function 
needs a method of performing the initialization the first time that it 
is called from any thread.</p><p class="docText">A library function can perform one-time initialization using the <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_once()</span> function.</p><pre>#include &lt;pthread.h&gt;

int <b>pthread_once</b>(pthread_once_t *<span class="docEmphasis">once_control</span>, void (*<span class="docEmphasis">init</span>)(void));</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or a positive error number on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_once()</span> function uses the state of the argument <span class="docEmphasis">once_control</span> to ensure that the caller-defined function pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">init</span> is called just once, no matter how many times or from how many different threads the <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_once()</span> call is made.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">init</span> function is called without any arguments, and thus has the following form:</p><pre>void
init(void)
{
    /* Function body */
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">once_control</span> argument is a pointer to a variable that must be statically initialized with the value <tt>PTHREAD_ONCE_INIT</tt>:</p><pre>pthread_once_t once_var = PTHREAD_ONCE_INIT;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The first call to <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_once()</span> that specifies a pointer to a particular <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_once_t</span> variable modifies the value of the variable pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">once_control</span> so that subsequent calls to <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_once()</span> don’t invoke <span class="docEmphasis">init</span>.</p><p class="docText">One common use of <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_once()</span> is in conjunction with thread-specific data, which we describe next.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The main reason for the existence of <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_once()</span> is that in early versions of Pthreads, it was not possible to statically initialize a mutex. Instead, the use of <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_mutex_init()</span>
 was required ([Butenhof, 1996]). Given the later addition of statically
 allocated mutexes, it is possible for a library function to perform 
one-time initialization using a statically allocated mutex and a static 
Boolean variable. Nevertheless, <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_once()</span> is retained as a convenience.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
