<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>31.4. Thread-Local Storage</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">31.4. Thread-Local Storage</h3><p class="docText">Like
 thread-specific data, thread-local storage provides persistent 
per-thread storage. This feature is nonstandard, but it is provided in 
the same or a similar form on many other UNIX implementations (e.g., 
Solaris and FreeBSD).</p><p class="docText">The
 main advantage of thread-local storage is that it is much simpler to 
use than thread-specific data. To create a thread-local variable, we 
simply include the <tt>__thread</tt> specifier in the declaration of a global or static variable:</p><pre>static __thread buf[MAX_ERROR_LEN];</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Each thread has its own copy of
 the variables declared with this specifier. The variables in a thread’s
 thread-local storage persist until the thread terminates, at which time
 the storage is automatically deallocated.</p><p class="docText">Note the following points about the declaration and use of thread-local variables:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <tt>__thread</tt> keyword must immediately follow the <tt>static</tt> or <tt>extern</tt> keyword, if either of these is specified in the variable’s declaration.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The
 declaration of a thread-local variable can include an initializer, in 
the same manner as a normal global or static variable declaration.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The C address (<tt>&amp;</tt>) operator can be used to obtain the address of a thread-local variable.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Thread-local
 storage requires support from the kernel (provided in Linux 2.6), the 
Pthreads implementation (provided in NPTL), and the C compiler (provided
 on x86-32 with <span class="docEmphasis">gcc</span> 3.3 and later).</p><p class="docText">Example 31-4 shows a thread-safe implementation of <span class="docEmphasis">strerror()</span> using thread-local storage. If we compile and link our test program (Example 31-2) with this version of <span class="docEmphasis">strerror()</span> to create an executable file, <tt>strerror_test_tls</tt>, then we see the following results when running the program:</p><pre>$ <b>./strerror_test_tls</b>
Main thread has called strerror()
Other thread about to call strerror()
Other thread: str (0x40376ab0) = Operation not permitted
Main thread:  str (0x40175080) = Invalid argument</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E1UEK">Example 31-4. A thread-safe implementation of <span class="docEmphasis">strerror()</span> using thread-local storage</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>threads/strerror_tls.c</b>
#define _GNU_SOURCE                 /* Get '_sys_nerr' and '_sys_errlist'
                                       declarations from &lt;stdio.h&gt; */
#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;
#include &lt;string.h&gt;           /* Get declaration of strerror() */
#include &lt;pthread.h&gt;

#define MAX_ERROR_LEN 256           /* Maximum length of string in per-thread
                                       buffer returned by strerror() */

static __thread char buf[MAX_ERROR_LEN];
                                    /* Thread-local return buffer */

char *
strerror(int err)
{
    if (err &lt; 0 || err &gt;= _sys_nerr || _sys_errlist[err] == NULL) {
        snprintf(buf, MAX_ERROR_LEN, "Unknown error %d", err);
    } else {
        strncpy(buf, _sys_errlist[err], MAX_ERROR_LEN - 1);
        buf[MAX_ERROR_LEN - 1] = '\0';          /* Ensure null termination */
    }

    return buf;
}
     <b>threads/strerror_tls.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
