<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>31.5. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">31.5. Summary</h3><p class="docText">A
 function is said to be thread-safe if it can safely be invoked from 
multiple threads at the same time. The usual reason a function is not 
thread-safe is that it makes use of global or static variables. One way 
to render a non-thread-safe function safe in a multithreaded application
 is to guard all calls to the function with a mutex lock. This approach 
suffers the problem that it reduces concurrency, because only one thread
 can be in the function at any time. An approach that allows greater 
concurrency is to add mutex locks around just those parts of the 
function that manipulate shared variables (the critical sections).</p><p class="docText">Mutexes
 can be used to render most functions thread-safe, but they carry a 
performance penalty because there is a cost to locking and unlocking a 
mutex. By avoiding the use of global and static variables, a reentrant 
function achieves thread-safety without the use of mutexes.</p><p class="docText">Most
 of the functions specified in SUSv3 are required to be thread-safe. 
SUSv3 also lists a small set of functions that are not required to be 
thread-safe. Typically, these are functions that employ static storage 
to return information to the caller or to maintain information between 
successive calls. By definition, such functions are not reentrant, and 
mutexes can’t be used to make them thread-safe. We considered two 
roughly equivalent coding techniques—thread-specific data and 
thread-local storage—that can be used to render an unsafe function 
thread-safe without needing to change its interface. Both of these 
techniques allow a function to allocate persistent, per-thread storage.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECTEK">31.5.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EGTEK">31.5.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">Refer to the sources of further information listed in Section 29.10.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
