<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>32.2. Cancellation State and Type</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">32.2. Cancellation State and Type</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_setcancelstate()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_setcanceltype()</span> functions set flags that allow a thread to control how it responds to a cancellation request.</p><pre>#include &lt;pthread.h&gt;

int <b>pthread_setcancelstate</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">state</span>, int *<span class="docEmphasis">oldstate</span>);
int <b>pthread_setcanceltype</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">type</span>, int *<span class="docEmphasis">oldtype</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Both return 0 on success, or a positive error number on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_setcancelstate()</span> function sets the calling thread’s cancelability state to the value given in <span class="docEmphasis">state</span>. This argument has one of the following values:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">PTHREAD_CANCEL_DISABLE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The thread is not cancelable. If a cancellation request is received, it remains pending until cancelability is enabled.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">PTHREAD_CANCEL_ENABLE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The thread is cancelable. This is the default cancelability state in newly created threads.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">The thread’s previous cancelability state is returned in the location pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">oldstate</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">If we are not interested in the previous cancelability state, Linux allows <span class="docEmphasis">oldstate</span> to be specified as <tt>NULL</tt>.
 This is the case on many other implementations as well; however, SUSv3 
doesn’t specify this feature, so portable applications can’t rely on it.
 We should always specify a non-<tt>NULL</tt> value for <span class="docEmphasis">oldstate</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Temporarily disabling cancellation (<tt>PTHREAD_CANCEL_DISABLE</tt>) is useful if a thread is executing a section of code where <span class="docEmphasis">all</span> of the steps must be completed.</p><p class="docText">If a thread is cancelable (<tt>PTHREAD_CANCEL_ENABLE</tt>), then the treatment of a cancellation request is determined by the thread’s cancelability type, which is specified by the <span class="docEmphasis">type</span> argument in a call to <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_setcanceltype()</span>. This argument has one of the following values:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">PTHREAD_CANCEL_ASYNCHRONOUS</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The
 thread may be canceled at any time (perhaps, but not necessarily, 
immediately). Asynchronous cancelability is rarely useful, and we defer 
discussion of it until Section 32.6.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">PTHREAD_CANCEL_DEFERRED</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The
 cancellation remains pending until a cancellation point (see the next 
section) is reached. This is the default cancelability type in newly 
created threads. We say more about deferred cancelability in the 
following sections.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">The thread’s previous cancelability type is returned in the location pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">oldtype</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">As with the <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_setcancelstate() oldstate</span> argument, many implementations, including Linux, allow <span class="docEmphasis">oldtype</span> to be specified as <tt>NULL</tt>
 if we are not interested in the previous cancelability type. Again, 
SUSv3 doesn’t specify this feature, and portable applications can’t rely
 on it We should always specify a non-<tt>NULL</tt> value for <span class="docEmphasis">oldtype</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">When a thread calls <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, the child inherits the calling thread’s cancelability type and state. When a thread calls <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, the cancelability type and state of the main thread of the new program are reset to <tt>PTHREAD_CANCEL_ENABLE</tt> and <tt>PTHREAD_CANCEL_DEFERRED</tt>, respectively.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
