<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>32.3. Cancellation Points</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">32.3. Cancellation Points</h3><p class="docText">When cancelability is enabled and deferred, a cancellation request is acted upon only when a thread next reaches a <span class="docEmphasis">cancellation point</span>. A cancellation point is a call to one of a set of functions defined by the implementation.</p><p class="docText">SUSv3 specifies that the functions shown in Table 32-1 <span class="docEmphasis">must</span>
 be cancellation points if they are provided by an implementation. Most 
of these are functions that are capable of blocking the thread for an 
indefinite period of time.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 32-1. Functions required to be cancellation points by SUSv3</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">aio_suspend()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">clock_nanosleep()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">close()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">connect()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">creat()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">fcntl(F_SETLKW)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">fsync()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">fdatasync()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getmsg()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">getpmsg()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">lockf(F_LOCK)</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">mq_receive()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">mq_send()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">mq_timedreceive()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">mq_timedsend()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">msgrcv()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">msgsnd()</span></p>
<span class="docEmphasis">msync()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">open()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">pause()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">pread()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">pselect()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_timedwait()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_wait()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">pthread_join()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">pthread_testcancel()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">putmsg()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">putpmsg()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">pwrite()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">read()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">readv()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">recv()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">recvfrom()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">recvmsg()</span></p>
<span class="docEmphasis">select()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">sem_timedwait()</span>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">send()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sendmsg()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sendto()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sigpause()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sigsuspend()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sigtimedwait()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sigwait()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sigwaitinfo()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sleep()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">system()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">tcdrain()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">usleep()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">waitid()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">waitpid()</span></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">write()</span></p>
<span class="docEmphasis">writev()</span></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">In addition to the functions in Table 32-1, SUSv3 specifies a larger group of functions that an implementation <span class="docEmphasis">may</span> define as cancellation points. These include the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> functions, the <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen</span> API, the <span class="docEmphasis">syslog</span> API, <span class="docEmphasis">nftw()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">popen()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">unlink()</span>, and various functions that retrieve information from system files such as the <span class="docEmphasis">utmp</span> file. A portable program must correctly handle the possibility that a thread may be canceled when calling these functions.</p><p class="docText">SUSv3
 specifies that aside from the two lists of functions that must and may 
be cancellation points, none of the other functions in the standard may 
act as cancellation points (i.e., a portable program doesn’t need to 
handle the possibility that calling these other functions could 
precipitate thread cancellation).</p><p class="docText">SUSv4 adds <span class="docEmphasis">openat()</span> to the list of functions that must be cancellation points, and removes <span class="docEmphasis">sigpause()</span> (it moves to the list of functions that <span class="docEmphasis">may</span> be cancellation points) and <span class="docEmphasis">usleep()</span> (which is dropped from the standard).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">An
 implementation is free to mark additional functions that are not 
specified in the standard as cancellation points. Any function that 
might block (perhaps because it might access a file) is a likely 
candidate to be a cancellation point. Within <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>, many nonstandard functions are marked as cancellation points for this reason.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Upon
 receiving a cancellation request, a thread whose cancelability is 
enabled and deferred terminates when it next reaches a cancellation 
point. If the thread was not detached, then some other thread in the 
process must join with it, in order to prevent it from becoming a zombie
 thread. When a canceled thread is joined, the value returned in the 
second argument to <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_join()</span> is a special thread return value: <tt>PTHREAD_CANCELED</tt>.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENIFK">32.3.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ERIFK">32.3.1.1. Example program</h5><p class="docText">Example 32-1 shows a simple example of the use of <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cancel()</span>.
 The main program creates a thread that executes an infinite loop, 
sleeping for a second and printing the value of a loop counter. (This 
thread will terminate only if it is sent a cancellation request or if 
the process exits.) Meanwhile, the main program sleeps for 3 seconds, 
and then sends a cancellation request to the thread that it created. 
When we run this program, we see the following:</p><pre>$ <b>./t_pthread_cancel</b>
New thread started
Loop 1
Loop 2
Loop 3
Thread was canceled</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EQJFK">Example 32-1. Canceling a thread with <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cancel()</span></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>threads/thread_cancel.c</b>
#include &lt;pthread.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

static void *
threadFunc(void *arg)
{
    int j;
    printf("New thread started\n");     /* May be a cancellation point */
    for (j = 1; ; j++) {
        printf("Loop %d\n", j);         /* May be a cancellation point */
        sleep(1);                       /* A cancellation point */
    }

    /* NOTREACHED */
    return NULL;
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    pthread_t thr;
    int s;
    void *res;

    s = pthread_create(&amp;thr, NULL, threadFunc, NULL);
    if (s != 0)
        errExitEN(s, "pthread_create");

    sleep(3);                           /* Allow new thread to run a while */

    s = pthread_cancel(thr);
    if (s != 0)
        errExitEN(s, "pthread_cancel");

    s = pthread_join(thr, &amp;res);
    if (s != 0)
        errExitEN(s, "pthread_join");

    if (res == PTHREAD_CANCELED)
        printf("Thread was canceled\n");
    else
        printf("Thread was not canceled (should not happen!)\n");

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
      <b>threads/thread_cancel.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
