<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>32.6. Asynchronous Cancelability</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">32.6. Asynchronous Cancelability</h3><p class="docText">When a thread is made asynchronously cancelable (cancelability type <tt>PTHREAD_CANCEL_ASYNCHRONOUS</tt>),
 it may be canceled at any time (i.e., at any machine-language 
instruction); delivery of a cancellation is not held off until the 
thread next reaches a cancellation point.</p><p class="docText">The
 problem with asynchronous cancellation is that, although cleanup 
handlers are still invoked, the handlers have no way of determining the 
state of a thread. In the program in Example 32-2, which employs the deferred cancelability type, the thread can be canceled only when it executes the call to <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_wait()</span>, which is the only cancellation point. By this time, we know that <span class="docEmphasis">buf</span> has been initialized to point to a block of allocated memory and that the mutex <span class="docEmphasis">mtx</span> has been locked. However, with asynchronous cancelability, the thread could be canceled at any point; for example, before the <span class="docEmphasis">malloc()</span> call, between the <span class="docEmphasis">malloc()</span>
 call and locking the mutex, or after locking the mutex. The cleanup 
handler has no way of knowing where cancellation has occurred, or 
precisely which cleanup steps are required. Furthermore, the thread 
might even be canceled <span class="docEmphasis">during</span> the <span class="docEmphasis">malloc()</span> call, after which chaos is likely to result (Section 7.1.3).</p><p class="docText">As
 a general principle, an asynchronously cancelable thread can’t allocate
 any resources or acquire any mutexes, semaphores, or locks. This 
precludes the use of a wide range of library functions, including most 
of the Pthreads functions. (SUSv3 makes exceptions for <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cancel()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_setcancelstate()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_setcanceltype()</span>, which are explicitly required to be <span class="docEmphasis">async-cancel-safe</span>;
 that is, an implementation must make them safe to call from a thread 
that is asynchronously cancelable.) In other words, there are few 
circumstances where asynchronous cancellation is useful. One such 
circumstance is canceling a thread that is in a compute-bound loop.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
