<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>32.7. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">32.7. Summary</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cancel()</span>
 function allows one thread to send another thread a cancellation 
request, which is a request that the target thread should terminate.</p><p class="docText">How
 the target thread reacts to this request is determined by its 
cancelability state and type. If the cancelability state is currently 
set to disabled, the request will remain pending until the cancelability
 state is set to enabled. If cancelability is enabled, the cancelability
 type determines when the target thread reacts to the request. If the 
type is deferred, the cancellation occurs when the thread next calls one
 of a number of functions specified as cancellation points by SUSv3. If 
the type is asynchronous, cancellation may occur at any time (this is 
rarely useful).</p><p class="docText">A 
thread can establish a stack of cleanup handlers, which are 
programmer-defined functions that are invoked automatically to perform 
cleanups (e.g., restoring the states of shared variables, or unlocking 
mutexes) if the thread is canceled.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EY1EK">32.7.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E31EK">32.7.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">Refer to the sources of further information listed in Section 29.10.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
