<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>33.1. Thread Stacks</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">33.1. Thread Stacks</h3><p class="docText">Each
 thread has its own stack whose size is fixed when the thread is 
created. On Linux/x86-32, for all threads other than the main thread, 
the default size of the per-thread stack is 2 MB. (On some 64-bit 
architectures, the default size is higher; for example, it is 32 MB on 
IA-64.) The main thread has a much larger space for stack growth (refer 
to Figure 29-1, in Section 29.2).</p><p class="docText">Occasionally, it is useful to change the size of a thread’s stack. The <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_attr_setstacksize()</span> function sets a thread attribute (Section 29.8) that determines the size of the stack in threads created using the thread attributes object. The related <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_attr_setstack()</span>
 function can be used to control both the size and the location of the 
stack, but setting the location of a stack can decrease application 
portability. The manual pages provide details of these functions.</p><p class="docText">One
 reason to change the size of per-thread stacks is to allow for larger 
stacks for threads that allocate large automatic variables or make 
nested function calls of great depth (perhaps because of recursion). 
Alternatively, an application may want to reduce the size of per-thread 
stacks to allow for a greater number of threads within a process. For 
example, on x86-32, where the user-accessible virtual address space is 3
 GB, the default stack size of 2 MB means that we can create a maximum 
of around 1500 threads. (The precise maximum depends on how much virtual
 memory is consumed by the text and data segments, shared libraries, and
 so on.) The minimum stack that can be employed on a particular 
architecture can be determined by calling <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf(_SC_THREAD_STACK_MIN)</span>. For the NPTL implementation on Linux/x86-32, this call returns the value 16,384.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Under the NPTL threading implementation, if the stack size resource limit (<tt>RLIMIT_STACK</tt>) is set to anything other than <span class="docEmphasis">unlimited</span>, then it is used as the default stack size when creating new threads. This limit must be set <span class="docEmphasis">before</span> the program is executed, typically by using the <span class="docEmphasis">ulimit -s</span> shell built-in command (<span class="docEmphasis">limit stacksize</span> in the C shell) before executing the program. It is not sufficient to use <span class="docEmphasis">setrlimit()</span>
 within the main program to set the limit, because NPTL makes its 
determination of the default stack size during the run-time 
initialization that occurs before <span class="docEmphasis">main()</span> is invoked.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
