<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>33.2. Threads and Signals</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">33.2. Threads and Signals</h3><p class="docText">The
 UNIX signal model was designed with the UNIX process model in mind, and
 predated the arrival of Pthreads by a couple of decades. As a result, 
there are some significant conflicts between the signal and thread 
models. These conflicts arose primarily from the need to maintain the 
traditional signal semantics for single-threaded processes (i.e., the 
signal semantics of traditional programs should not be changed by 
Pthreads), while at the same time developing a signal model that would 
be usable within a multithreaded process.</p><p class="docText">The
 differences between the signal and thread models mean that combining 
signals and threads is complex, and should be avoided whenever possible.
 Nevertheless, sometimes we must deal with signals in a threaded 
program. In this section, we discuss the interactions between threads 
and signals, and describe various functions that are useful in threaded 
programs that deal with signals.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EH4EK">33.2.1. How the UNIX Signal Model Maps to Threads</h4><p class="docText">To
 understand how UNIX signals map to the Pthreads model, we need to know 
which aspects of the signal model are process-wide (i.e., are shared by 
all of the threads in the process) as opposed to those aspects that are 
specific to individual threads within the process. The following list 
summarizes the key points:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Signal actions are process-wide. If any unhandled signal whose default action is <span class="docEmphasis">stop</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">terminate</span> is delivered to any thread in a process, then all of the threads in the process are stopped or terminated.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Signal dispositions are process-wide; all threads in a process share the same disposition for each signal. If one thread uses <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span> to establish a handler for, say, <tt>SIGINT</tt>, then that handler may be invoked from any thread to which the <tt>SIGINT</tt> is delivered. Similarly, if one thread sets the disposition of a signal to <span class="docEmphasis">ignore</span>, then that signal is ignored by all threads.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A signal may be directed to either the process as a whole or to a specific thread. A signal is thread-directed if:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">it
 is generated as the direct result of the execution of a specific 
hardware instruction within the context of the thread (i.e., the 
hardware exceptions described in Section 22.4: <tt>SIGBUS</tt>, <tt>SIGFPE</tt>, <tt>SIGILL</tt>, and <tt>SIGSEGV</tt>);</p></li><li><p class="docList">it is a <tt>SIGPIPE</tt> signal generated when the thread tried to write to a broken pipe; or</p></li><li><p class="docList">it is sent using <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_kill()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_sigqueue()</span>, which are functions (described in Section 33.2.3) that allow one thread to send a signal to another thread within the same process.</p></li></ul><p class="docList">All signals generated by other mechanisms are process-directed. Examples are signals sent from another process using <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">sigqueue()</span>; signals such as <tt>SIGINT</tt> and <tt>SIGTSTP</tt>,
 generated when the user types one of the terminal special characters 
that generate a signal; and signals generated for software events such 
as the resizing of a terminal window (<tt>SIGWINCH</tt>) or the expiration of a timer (e.g., <tt>SIGALRM</tt>).</p></li><li><p class="docList">When
 a signal is delivered to a multithreaded process that has established a
 signal handler, the kernel arbitrarily selects one thread in the 
process to which to deliver the signal and invokes the handler in that 
thread. This behavior is consistent with maintaining the traditional 
signal semantics. It would not make sense for a process to perform the 
signal handling actions multiple times in response to a single signal.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The
 signal mask is per-thread. (There is no notion of a process-wide signal
 mask that governs all threads in a multithreaded process.) Threads can 
independently block or unblock different signals using <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_sigmask()</span>,
 a new function defined by the Pthreads API. By manipulating the 
per-thread signal masks, an application can control which thread(s) may 
handle a signal that is directed to the whole process.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The
 kernel maintains a record of the signals that are pending for the 
process as a whole, as well as a record of the signals that are pending 
for each thread. A call to <span class="docEmphasis">sigpending()</span>
 returns the union of the set of signals that are pending for the 
process and those that are pending for the calling thread. In a newly 
created thread, the per-thread set of pending signals is initially 
empty. A thread-directed signal can be delivered only to the target 
thread. If the thread is blocking the signal, it will remain pending 
until the thread unblocks the signal (or terminates).</p></li><li><p class="docList">If a signal handler interrupts a call to <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_mutex_lock()</span>, then the call is always automatically restarted. If a signal handler interrupts a call to <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_cond_wait()</span>,
 then the call either is restarted automatically (this is what Linux 
does) or returns 0, indicating a spurious wake-up (in which case a 
well-designed application will recheck the corresponding predicate and 
restart the call, as described in Section 30.2.3). SUSv3 requires these two functions to behave as described here.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The alternate signal stack is per-thread (refer to the description of <span class="docEmphasis">sigaltstack()</span> in Section 21.3). A newly created thread doesn’t inherit the alternate signal stack from its creator.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">More
 precisely, SUSv3 specifies that there is a separate alternate signal 
stack for each kernel scheduling entity (KSE). On a system with a 1:1 
threading implementation, as on Linux, there is one KSE per thread (see Section 33.4).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EOEFK">33.2.2. Manipulating the Thread Signal Mask</h4><p class="docText">When a new thread is created, it inherits a copy of the signal mask of the thread that created it. A thread can use <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_sigmask()</span> to change its signal mask, to retrieve the existing mask, or both.</p><pre>#include &lt;signal.h&gt;

int <b>pthread_sigmask</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">how</span>, const sigset_t *<span class="docEmphasis">set</span>, sigset_t *<span class="docEmphasis">oldset</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or a positive error number on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Other than the fact that it operates on the thread signal mask, the use of <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_sigmask()</span> is the same as the use of <span class="docEmphasis">sigprocmask()</span> (Section 20.10).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">SUSv3 notes that the use of <span class="docEmphasis">sigprocmask()</span> within a multithreaded program is unspecified. We can’t portably employ <span class="docEmphasis">sigprocmask()</span> in a multithreaded program. In practice, <span class="docEmphasis">sigprocmask()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_sigmask()</span> are identical on many implementations, including Linux.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESHFK">33.2.3. Sending a Signal to a Thread</h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_kill()</span> function sends the signal <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span> to another thread in the same process. The target thread is identified by the argument <span class="docEmphasis">thread</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;signal.h&gt;

int <b>pthread_kill</b>(pthread_t <span class="docEmphasis">thread</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or a positive error number on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Because a thread ID is guaranteed to be unique only within a process (see Section 29.5), we can’t use <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_kill()</span> to send a signal to a thread in another process.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_kill()</span> function is implemented using the Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">tgkill(tgid, tid, sig)</span> system call, which sends the signal <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span> to the thread identified by <span class="docEmphasis">tid</span> (a kernel thread ID of the type returned by <span class="docEmphasis">gettid()</span>) within the thread group identified by <span class="docEmphasis">tgid</span>. See the <span class="docEmphasis">tgkill(2)</span> manual page for further details.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_sigqueue()</span> function combines the functionality of <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_kill()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sigqueue()</span> (Section 22.8.1): it sends a signal with accompanying data to another thread in the same process.</p><pre>#define _GNU_SOURCE@
#include &lt;signal.h&gt;

int <b>pthread_sigqueue</b>(pthread_t <span class="docEmphasis">thread</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span>, const union sigval <span class="docEmphasis">value</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or a positive error number on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">As with <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_kill()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span> specifies the signal to be sent, and <span class="docEmphasis">thread</span> identifies the target thread. The <span class="docEmphasis">value</span> argument specifies the data to accompany the signal, and is used in the same way as the equivalent argument of <span class="docEmphasis">sigqueue()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_sigqueue()</span> function was added to <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> in version 2.11 and requires support from the kernel. This support is provided by the <span class="docEmphasis">rt_tgsigqueueinfo()</span> system call, which was added in Linux 2.6.31.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENLFK">33.2.4. Dealing with Asynchronous Signals Sanely</h4><p class="docText">In Chapter 20 to Chapter 22,
 we discussed various factors—such as reentrancy issues, the need to 
restart interrupted system calls, and avoiding race conditions—that can 
make it complex to deal with asynchronously generated signals via signal
 handlers. Furthermore, none of the functions in the Pthreads API is 
among the set of async-signal-safe functions that we can safely call 
from within a signal handler (Section 21.1.2).
 For these reasons, multithreaded programs that must deal with 
asynchronously generated signals generally should not use a signal 
handler as the mechanism to receive notification of signal delivery. 
Instead, the preferred approach is the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">All
 threads block all of the asynchronous signals that the process might 
receive. The simplest way to do this is to block the signals in the main
 thread before any other threads are created. Each subsequently created 
thread will inherit a copy of the main thread’s signal mask.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Create a single dedicated thread that accepts incoming signals using <span class="docEmphasis">sigwaitinfo()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">sigtimedwait()</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">sigwait()</span>. We described <span class="docEmphasis">sigwaitinfo()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sigtimedwait()</span> in Section 22.10. We describe <span class="docEmphasis">sigwait()</span> below.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The
 advantage of this approach is that asynchronously generated signals are
 received synchronously. As it accepts incoming signals, the dedicated 
thread can safely modify shared variables (under mutex control) and call
 non-async-signal-safe functions. It can also signal condition 
variables, and employ other thread and process communication and 
synchronization mechanisms.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sigwait()</span> function waits for the delivery of one of the signals in the signal set pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">set</span>, accepts that signal, and returns it in <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;signal.h&gt;

int <b>sigwait</b>(const sigset_t *<span class="docEmphasis">set</span>, int *<span class="docEmphasis">sig</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or a positive error number on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The operation of <span class="docEmphasis">sigwait()</span> is the same as <span class="docEmphasis">sigwaitinfo()</span>, except that:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">instead of returning a <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span> structure describing the signal, <span class="docEmphasis">sigwait()</span> returns just the signal number; and</p></li><li><p class="docList">the
 return value is consistent with other thread-related functions (rather 
than the 0 or -1 returned by traditional UNIX system calls).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">If multiple threads are waiting for the same signal with <span class="docEmphasis">sigwait()</span>, only one of the threads will actually accept the signal when it arrives. Which of the threads this will be is indeterminate.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
