<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>33.3. Threads and Process Control</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">33.3. Threads and Process Control</h3><p class="docText">Like the signals mechanism, <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>
 predate the Pthreads API. In the following paragraphs, we note some 
details concerning the use of these system calls in threaded programs.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E15EK">33.3.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E55EK">33.3.1.1. Threads and <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span></h5><p class="docText">When any thread calls one of the <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> functions, the calling program is completely replaced. All threads, except the one that called <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>,
 vanish immediately. None of the threads executes destructors for 
thread-specific data or calls cleanup handlers. All of the 
(process-private) mutexes and condition variables belonging to the 
process also disappear. After an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, the thread ID of the remaining thread is unspecified.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EM6EK">33.3.1.2. Threads and <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span></h5><p class="docText">When a multithreaded process calls <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>,
 only the calling thread is replicated in the child process. (The ID of 
the thread in the child is the same as the ID of the thread that called <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>
 in the parent.) All of the other threads vanish in the child; no 
thread-specific data destructors or cleanup handlers are executed for 
those threads. This can lead to various problems:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Although
 only the calling thread is replicated in the child, the states of 
global variables, as well as all Pthreads objects such as mutexes and 
condition variables, are preserved in the child. (This is so because 
these Pthreads objects are allocated within the parent’s memory, and the
 child gets a duplicate of that memory.) This can lead to tricky 
scenarios. For example, suppose that another thread had locked a mutex 
at the time of the <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>
 and is part-way through updating a global data structure. In this case,
 the thread in the child would not be able to unlock the mutex (since it
 is not the mutex owner) and would block if it tried to acquire the 
mutex. Furthermore, the child’s copy of the global data structure is 
probably in an inconsistent state, because the thread that was updating 
it vanished part-way through the update.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Since destructors for thread-specific data and cleanup handlers are not called, a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>
 in a multithreaded program can cause memory leaks in the child. 
Furthermore, the thread-specific data items created by other threads are
 likely to be inaccessible to the thread in the new child, since it 
doesn’t have pointers referring to these items.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Because of these problems, the usual recommendation is that the only use of <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> in a multithreaded process should be one that is followed by an immediate <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> causes all of the Pthreads objects in the child process to disappear as the new program overwrites the memory of the process.</p><p class="docText">For programs that must use a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> that is not followed by an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, the Pthreads API provides a mechanism for defining <span class="docEmphasis">fork handlers</span>. Fork handlers are established using a <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_atfork()</span> call of the following form:</p><pre>pthread_atfork(prepare_func, parent_func, child_func);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Each <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_atfork()</span> call adds <span class="docEmphasis">prepare_func</span>
 to a list of functions that will be automatically executed (in reverse 
order of registration) before the new child process is created when <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> is called. Similarly, <span class="docEmphasis">parent_func</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">child_func</span>
 are added to a list functions that will be called automatically (in 
order of registration), in, respectively, the parent and child process, 
just before <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> returns.</p><p class="docText">Fork
 handlers are sometimes useful for library code that makes use of 
threads. In the absence of fork handlers, there would be no way for the 
library to deal with applications that naively make use of the library 
and call <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, unaware that the library has created some threads.</p><p class="docText">The child produced by <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> inherits fork handlers from the thread that called <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>. During an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, fork handlers are not preserved (they can’t be, since the code of the handlers is overwritten during the <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>).</p><p class="docText">Further details on fork handlers, and examples of their use, can be found in [Butenhof, 1996].</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On Linux, fork handlers are not called if a program using the NPTL threading library calls <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span>. However, in a program using LinuxThreads, fork handlers are called in this case.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EMCFK">33.3.1.3. Threads and <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span></h5><p class="docText">If any thread calls <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span> or, equivalently, the main thread does a <tt>return</tt>, all threads immediately vanish; no thread-specific data destructors or cleanup handlers are executed.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
