<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>33.4. Thread Implementation Models</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">33.4. Thread Implementation Models</h3><p class="docText">In
 this section, we go into some theory, briefly considering three 
different models for implementing a threading API. This provides useful 
background for Section 33.5,
 where we consider the Linux threading implementations. The differences 
between these implementation models hinge on how threads are mapped onto
 <span class="docEmphasis">kernel scheduling entities</span>
 (KSEs), which are the units to which the kernel allocates the CPU and 
other system resources. (In traditional UNIX implementations that 
predate threads, the term <span class="docEmphasis">kernel scheduling entity</span> is synonymous with the term <span class="docEmphasis">process</span>.)</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJ6EK">33.4.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EN6EK">33.4.1.1. Many-to-one (M:1) implementations (user-level threads)</h5><p class="docText">In
 M:1 threading implementations, all of the details of thread creation, 
scheduling, and synchronization (mutex locking, waiting on condition 
variables, and so on) are handled entirely within the process by a 
user-space threading library. The kernel knows nothing about the 
existence of multiple threads within the process.</p><p class="docText">M:1
 implementations have a few advantages. The greatest advantage is that 
many threading operations—for example, creating and terminating a 
thread, context switching between threads, and mutex and condition 
variable operations—are fast, since a switch to kernel mode is not 
required. Furthermore, since kernel support for the threading library is
 not required, an M:1 implementation can be relatively easily ported 
from one system to another.</p><p class="docText">However, M:1 implementations suffer from some serious disadvantages:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">When a thread makes a system call such as <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>, control passes from the user-space threading library to the kernel. This means that if the <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> call blocks, then all threads in the process are blocked.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The
 kernel can’t schedule the threads of a process. Since the kernel is 
unaware of the existence of multiple threads within the process, it 
can’t schedule the separate threads to different processors on 
multiprocessor hardware. Nor is it possible to meaningfully assign a 
thread in one process a higher priority than a thread in another 
process, since the scheduling of the threads is handled entirely within 
the process.</p></li></ul><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E56EK">33.4.1.2. One-to-one (1:1) implementations (kernel-level threads)</h5><p class="docText">In
 a 1:1 threading implementation, each thread maps onto a separate KSE. 
The kernel handles each thread’s scheduling separately. Thread 
synchronization operations are implemented using system calls into the 
kernel.</p><p class="docText">1:1
 implementations eliminate the disadvantages suffered by M:1 
implementations. A blocking system call does not cause all of the 
threads in a process to block, and the kernel can schedule the threads 
of a process onto different CPUs on multiprocessor hardware.</p><p class="docText">However,
 operations such as thread creation, context switching, and 
synchronization are slower on a 1:1 implementations, since a switch into
 kernel mode is required. Furthermore, the overhead required to maintain
 a separate KSE for each of the threads in an application that contains a
 large number of threads may place a significant load on the kernel 
scheduler, degrading overall system performance.</p><p class="docText">Despite
 these disadvantages, a 1:1 implementation is usually preferred over an 
M:1 implementation. Both of the Linux threading 
implementations—LinuxThreads and NPTL—employ the 1:1 model.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">During
 the development of NPTL, significant effort went into rewriting the 
kernel scheduler and devising a threading implementation that would 
allow the efficient execution of multithreaded processes containing many
 thousands of threads. Subsequent testing showed that this goal was 
achieved.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EUAFK">33.4.1.3. Many-to-many (M:N) implementations (two-level model)</h5><p class="docText">M:N implementations aim to combine the advantages of the 1:1 and M:1 models, while eliminating their disadvantages.</p><p class="docText">In
 the M:N model, each process can have multiple associated KSEs, and 
several threads may map to each KSE. This design permits the kernel to 
distribute the threads of an application across multiple CPUs, while 
eliminating the possible scaling problems associated with applications 
that employ large numbers of threads.</p><p class="docText">The
 most significant disadvantage of the M:N model is complexity. The task 
of thread scheduling is shared between the kernel and the user-space 
threading library, which must cooperate and communicate information with
 one another. Managing signals according to the requirements of SUSv3 is
 also complex under an M:N implementation.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">An
 M:N implementation was initially considered for the NPTL threading 
implementation, but rejected as requiring changes to the kernel that 
were too wide ranging and perhaps unnecessary, given the ability of the 
Linux scheduler to scale well, even when dealing with large numbers of 
KSEs.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
