<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>33.5. Linux Implementations of POSIX Threads</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">33.5. Linux Implementations of POSIX Threads</h3><p class="docText">Linux has two main implementations of the Pthreads API:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">LinuxThreads</span>: This is the original Linux threading implementation, developed by Xavier Leroy.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">NPTL (Native POSIX Threads Library)</span>:
 This is the modern Linux threading implementation, developed by Ulrich 
Drepper and Ingo Molnar as a successor to LinuxThreads. NPTL provides 
performance that is superior to LinuxThreads, and it adheres more 
closely to the SUSv3 specification for Pthreads. Support for NPTL 
required changes to the kernel, and these changes appeared in Linux 2.6.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">For
 a while, it appeared that the successor to LinuxThreads would be 
another implementation, called Next Generation POSIX Threads (NGPT), a 
threading implementation developed at IBM. NGPT employed an M:N design 
and performed significantly better than LinuxThreads. However, the NPTL 
developers decided to pursue a new implementation. This approach was 
justified—the 1:1-design NPTL was shown to perform better than NGPT. 
Following the release of NPTL, development of NGPT was discontinued.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">In
 the following sections, we consider further details of these two 
implementations, and note the points where they deviate from the SUSv3 
requirements for Pthreads.</p><p class="docText">At this point, it is worth emphasizing that the LinuxThreads implementation is now obsolete; it is not supported in <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> 2.4 and later. All new thread library development occurs only in NPTL.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERBFK">33.5.1. LinuxThreads</h4><p class="docText">For
 many years, LinuxThreads was the main threading implementation on 
Linux, and it was sufficient for implementing a variety of threaded 
applications. The essentials of the LinuxThreads implementation are as 
follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Threads are created using a <span class="docEmphasis">clone()</span> call that specifies the following flags:</p><pre>CLONE_VM | CLONE_FILES | CLONE_FS | CLONE_SIGHAND</pre><br/>
<p class="docList">This means that 
LinuxThreads threads share virtual memory, file descriptors, file 
system-related information (umask, root directory, and current working 
directory), and signal dispositions. However, threads don’t share 
process IDs and parent process IDs.</p></li><li><p class="docList">In
 addition to the threads created by the application, LinuxThreads 
creates an additional “manager” thread that handles thread creation and 
termination.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The
 implementation uses signals for its internal operation. With kernels 
that support realtime signals (Linux 2.2 and later), the first three 
realtime signals are used. With older kernels, <tt>SIGUSR1</tt> and <tt>SIGUSR2</tt>
 are used. Applications can’t use these signals. (The use of signals 
results in high latency for various thread synchronization operations.)</p></li></ul><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ELCFK">33.5.1.1. LinuxThreads deviations from specified behavior</h5><p class="docText">LinuxThreads
 doesn’t conform to the SUSv3 specification for Pthreads on a number of 
points. (The LinuxThreads implementation was constrained by the kernel 
features available at the time that it was developed; it was as 
conformant as practicable within those constraints.) The following list 
summarizes the nonconformances:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Calls to <span class="docEmphasis">getpid()</span> return a different value in each of the threads of a process. Calls to <span class="docEmphasis">getppid()</span> reflect the fact that every thread other than the main thread is created by the process’s manager thread (i.e., <span class="docEmphasis">getppid()</span> returns the process ID of the manager thread). Calls to <span class="docEmphasis">getppid()</span> in the other threads should return the same value as a call to <span class="docEmphasis">getppid()</span> in the main thread.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If one thread creates a child using <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, then any other thread should be able to obtain the termination status of that child using <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span> (or similar). However, this is not so; only the thread that created the child process can <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span> for it.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If a thread calls <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, then, as required by SUSv3, all other threads are terminated. However, if the <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>
 is done from any thread other than the main thread, then the resulting 
process will have the same process ID as the calling thread—that is, a 
process ID that is different from the main thread’s process ID. 
According to SUSv3, the process ID should be the same as that of the 
main thread.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Threads
 don’t share credentials (user and group IDs). When a multithreaded 
process is executing a set-user-ID program, this can lead to scenarios 
in which one thread can’t send a signal to another thread using <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_kill()</span>,
 because the credentials of the two threads have been changed in such a 
way that the sending thread no longer has permission to signal the 
target thread (refer to Figure 20-2, in Section 20.6).
 Furthermore, since the LinuxThreads implementation uses signals 
internally, various Pthreads operations can fail or hang if a thread 
changes its credentials.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Various aspects of the SUSv3 specification for the interaction between threads and signals are not honored:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">A signal that is sent to a process using <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">sigqueue()</span>
 should be delivered to, and handled by, an arbitrary thread in the 
target process that is not blocking the signal. However, since 
LinuxThreads threads have different process IDs, a signal can be 
targeted only at a specific thread. If that thread is blocking the 
signal, it remains pending, even if there are other threads that are not
 blocking the signal.</p></li><li><p class="docList">LinuxThreads
 doesn’t support the notion of signals that are pending for a process as
 whole; only per-thread pending signals are supported.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If
 a signal is directed at a process group that contains a multithreaded 
application, then the signal will be handled by all threads in the 
application (i.e., all threads that have established a signal handler), 
rather than by a single (arbitrary) thread. Such a signal may, for 
example, be generated by typing one of the terminal characters that 
generates a job-control signal for the foreground process group.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The alternate signal stack settings (established by <span class="docEmphasis">sigaltstack()</span>) are per-thread. However, because a new thread wrongly inherits its alternate signal stack settings from the caller of <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_create()</span>,
 the two threads share an alternate signal stack. SUSv3 requires that a 
new thread should start with no alternate signal stack defined. The 
consequence of this LinuxThreads nonconformance is that if two threads 
happen to simultaneously handle different signals on their shared 
alternate signal stacks at the same time, chaos is likely to result 
(e.g., a program crash). This problem may be very hard to reproduce and 
debug, since its occurrence depends on the probably rare event that the 
two signals are handled at the same time.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In a program using LinuxThreads, a new thread could make a call to <span class="docEmphasis">sigaltstack()</span>
 to ensure that it uses a different alternate signal stack from the 
thread that created it (or no stack at all). However, portable programs 
(and library functions that create threads) won’t know to do this, since
 it is not a requirement on other implementations. Furthermore, even if 
we employ this technique, there is still a possible race condition: the 
new thread could receive and handle a signal on the alternate stack 
before it has a chance to call <span class="docEmphasis">sigaltstack()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li></ul></li><li><p class="docList">Threads don’t share a common session ID and process group ID. The <span class="docEmphasis">setsid()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">setpgid()</span> system calls can’t be used to change the session or process group membership of a multithreaded process.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Record locks established using <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> are not shared. Overlapping lock requests of the same type are not merged.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Threads don’t share resource limits. SUSv3 specifies that resource limits are process-wide attributes.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The CPU time returned by <span class="docEmphasis">times()</span> and the resource usage information returned by <span class="docEmphasis">getrusage()</span> are per-thread. These system calls should return process-wide totals.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Some versions of <span class="docEmphasis">ps(1)</span> show all of the threads in a process (including the manager thread) as separate items with distinct process IDs.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Threads don’t share nice value set by <span class="docEmphasis">setpriority()</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Interval timers created using <span class="docEmphasis">setitimer()</span> are not shared between the threads.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Threads don’t share System V semaphore undo (<span class="docEmphasis">semadj</span>) values.</p></li></ul><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E3JFK">33.5.1.2. Other problems with LinuxThreads</h5><p class="docText">In addition to the above deviations from SUSv3, the LinuxThreads implementation has the following problems:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">If the manager thread is killed, then the remaining threads must be manually cleaned up.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A
 core dump of a multithreaded program may not include all of the threads
 of the process (or even the one that triggered the core dump).</p></li><li><p class="docList">The nonstandard <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> <tt>TIOCNOTTY</tt> operation can remove the process’s association with a controlling terminal only when called from the main thread.</p></li></ul><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EOKFK">33.5.2. NPTL</h4><p class="docText">NPTL was designed to address most of the shortcomings of LinuxThreads. In particular:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">NPTL provides much closer conformance to the SUSv3 specification for Pthreads.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Applications that employ large numbers of threads scale much better under NPTL than under LinuxThreads.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">NPTL
 allows an application to create large numbers of threads. The NPTL 
implementers were able to run test programs that created 100,000 
threads. With LinuxThreads, the practical limit on the number of threads
 is a few thousand. (Admittedly, very few applications need such large 
numbers of threads.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li></ul><p class="docText">Work
 on implementing NPTL began in 2002 and progressed over the next year or
 so. In parallel, various changes were made within the Linux kernel to 
accommodate the requirements of NPTL. The changes that appeared in the 
Linux 2.6 kernel to support NPTL included the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">refinements to the implementation of thread groups (Section 28.2.1);</p></li><li><p class="docList">the addition of futexes as a synchronization mechanism (futexes are a generic mechanism that was designed not just for NPTL);</p></li><li><p class="docList">the addition of new system calls (<span class="docEmphasis">get_thread_area()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">set_thread_area()</span>) to support thread-local storage;</p></li><li><p class="docList">support for threaded core dumps and debugging of multithreaded processes;</p></li><li><p class="docList">modifications to support management of signals in a manner consistent with the Pthreads model;</p></li><li><p class="docList">the addition of a new <span class="docEmphasis">exit_group()</span> system call to terminate all of the threads in a process (starting with <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> 2.3, <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span>—and thus also the <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span> library function—is aliased as a wrapper that invokes <span class="docEmphasis">exit_group()</span>, while a call to <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_exit()</span> invokes the true <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span> system call in the kernel, which terminates just the calling thread);</p></li><li><p class="docList">a rewrite of the kernel scheduler to allow efficient scheduling of very large numbers (i.e., thousands) of KSEs;</p></li><li><p class="docList">improved performance for the kernel’s process termination code; and</p></li><li><p class="docList">extensions to the <span class="docEmphasis">clone()</span> system call (Section 28.2).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The essentials of the NPTL implementation are as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Threads are created using a <span class="docEmphasis">clone()</span> call that specifies the following flags:</p><pre>CLONE_VM | CLONE_FILES | CLONE_FS | CLONE_SIGHAND |
CLONE_THREAD | CLONE_SETTLS | CLONE_PARENT_SETTID |
CLONE_CHILD_CLEARTID | CLONE_SYSVSEM</pre><br/>
<p class="docList">NPTL threads share all of the information that LinuxThreads threads share, and more. The <tt>CLONE_THREAD</tt>
 flag means that a thread is placed in the same thread group as its 
creator and shares the same process ID and parent process ID. The <tt>CLONE_SYSVSEM</tt> flag means that a thread shares System V semaphore undo values with its creator.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">When we use <span class="docEmphasis">ps(1)</span>
 to list a multithreaded process running under NPTL, we see just a 
single line of output. To see information about the threads within a 
process, we can use the <span class="docEmphasis">ps -L</span> option.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li><li><p class="docList">The implementation makes internal use of the first two realtime signals. Applications can’t use these signals.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">One
 of these signals is used to implement thread cancellation. The other 
signal is used as part of a technique that ensures that all of the 
threads in a process have the same user and group IDs. This technique is
 required because, at the kernel level, threads have distinct user and 
group credentials. Therefore, the NPTL implementation does some work in 
the wrapper function for each system call that changes user and group 
IDs (<span class="docEmphasis">setuid()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">setresuid()</span>, and so on, and their group analogs) that causes the IDs to be changed in all of the threads of the process.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li><li><p class="docList">Unlike LinuxThreads, NPTL doesn’t use manager threads.</p></li></ul><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EDPFK">33.5.2.1. NPTL standards conformance</h5><p class="docText">These
 changes mean that NPTL achieves much closer SUSv3 conformance than 
LinuxThreads. At the time of writing, the following nonconformance 
remains:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Threads don’t share a nice value.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">There are some additional NPTL nonconformances in earlier 2.6.<span class="docEmphasis">x</span> kernels:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">In
 kernels before 2.6.16, the alternate signal stack was per-thread, but a
 new thread wrongly inherited alternate signal stack settings 
(established by <span class="docEmphasis">sigaltstack()</span>) from the caller of <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_create()</span>, with the consequence that the two threads shared an alternate signal stack.</p></li><li><p class="docList">In kernels before 2.6.16, only a thread group leader (i.e., the main thread) could start a new session by calling <span class="docEmphasis">setsid()</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">In kernels before 2.6.16, only a thread group leader could use <span class="docEmphasis">setpgid()</span> to make the host process a process group leader.</p></li><li><p class="docList">In kernels prior to 2.6.12, interval timers created using <span class="docEmphasis">setitimer()</span> were not shared between the threads of a process.</p></li><li><p class="docList">In kernels prior to 2.6.10, resource limit settings were not shared between the threads of a process.</p></li><li><p class="docList">In kernels prior to 2.6.9, the CPU time returned by <span class="docEmphasis">times()</span> and the resource usage information returned by <span class="docEmphasis">getrusage()</span> were per-thread.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">NPTL
 was designed to be ABI-compatible with LinuxThreads. This means that 
programs that were linked against a GNU C library providing LinuxThreads
 don’t need to be relinked in order to use NPTL. However, some behaviors
 may change when the program is run with NPTL, primarily because NPTL 
adheres more closely to the SUSv3 specification for Pthreads.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E2SFK">33.5.3. Which Threading Implementation?</h4><p class="docText">Some
 Linux distributions ship with a GNU C library that provides both 
LinuxThreads and NPTL, with the default being determined by the dynamic 
linker according to the underlying kernel on which the system is 
running. (These distributions are by now historical because, since 
version 2.4, <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> no longer provides LinuxThreads.) Therefore, we may sometimes need to answer the following questions:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Which threading implementation is available in a particular Linux distribution?</p></li><li><p class="docList">On
 a Linux distribution that provides both LinuxThreads and NPTL, which 
implementation is used by default, and how can we explicitly select the 
implementation that is used by a program?</p></li></ul><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EZTFK">33.5.3.1. Discovering the threading implementation</h5><p class="docText">We
 can use a few techniques to discover the threading implementation that 
is available on a particular system, or to discover the default 
implementation that will be employed when a program is run on a system 
that provides both threading implementations.</p><p class="docText">On a system providing <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>
 version 2.3.2 or later, we can use the following command to discover 
which threading implementation the system provides, or, if it provides 
both implementation, then which one is used by default:</p><pre>$ <b>getconf GNU_LIBPTHREAD_VERSION</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">On a system where NPTL is the only or the default implementation, this will display a string such as the following:</p><pre>NPTL 2.3.4</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Since <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> 2.3.2, a program can obtain similar information by using <span class="docEmphasis">confstr(3)</span> to retrieve the value of the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>-specific <tt>_CS_GNU_LIBPTHREAD_VERSION</tt> configuration variable.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">On
 systems with older GNU C libraries, we must do a little more work. 
First, the following command can be used to show the pathname of the GNU
 C library that is used when we run a program (here, we use the example 
of the standard <span class="docEmphasis">ls</span> program, which resides at <tt>/bin/ls</tt>):</p><pre>$ <b>ldd /bin/ls | grep libc.so</b>
        libc.so.6 =&gt; /lib/tls/libc.so.6 (0x40050000)</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">We say a little more about the <span class="docEmphasis">ldd</span> (list dynamic dependencies) program in Section 41.5.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The pathname of the GNU C library is shown after the <tt>=&gt;</tt>. If we execute this pathname as a command, then <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> displays a range of information about itself. We can <span class="docEmphasis">grep</span> though this information to select the line that displays the threading implementation:</p><pre>$ <b>/lib/tls/libc.so.6 | egrep -i 'threads|nptl'</b>
        Native POSIX Threads Library by Ulrich Drepper et al</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We include <span class="docEmphasis">nptl</span> in the <span class="docEmphasis">egrep</span> regular expression because some <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> releases containing NPTL instead display a string like this:</p><pre>NPTL 0.61 by Ulrich Drepper</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Since the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>
 pathname may vary from one Linux distribution to another, we can employ
 shell command substitution to produce a command line that will display 
the threading implementation in use on any Linux system, as follows:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>$(ldd /bin/ls | grep libc.so | awk '{print $3}') | egrep -i 'threads|nptl'</b>
        Native POSIX Threads Library by Ulrich Drepper et al

					  </pre><br/>
<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EVWFK">33.5.3.2. Selecting the threading implementation used by a program</h5><p class="docText">On
 a Linux system that provides both NPTL and LinuxThreads, it is 
sometimes useful to be able to explicitly control which threading 
implementation is used. The most common example of this requirement is 
when we have an older program that depends on some (probably 
nonstandard) behavior of LinuxThreads, so that we want to force the 
program to run with that threading implementation, instead of the 
default NPTL.</p><p class="docText">For this purpose, we can employ a special environment variable understood by the dynamic linker: <tt>LD_ASSUME_KERNEL</tt>.
 As its name suggests, this environment variable tells the dynamic 
linker to operate as though it is running on top of a particular Linux 
kernel version. By specifying a kernel version that doesn’t provide 
support for NPTL (e.g., <tt>2.2.5</tt>), we 
can ensure that LinuxThreads is used. Thus, we could run a multithreaded
 program with LinuxThreads using the following command:</p><pre>$ <b>LD_ASSUME_KERNEL=2.2.5 ./prog</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">When we combine this 
environment variable setting with the command that we described earlier 
to show the threading implementation that is used, we see something like
 the following:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>export LD_ASSUME_KERNEL=2.2.5</b>
$ <b>$(ldd /bin/ls | grep libc.so | awk '{print $3}') | egrep -i 'threads|nptl'</b>
        linuxthreads-0.10 by Xavier Leroy

					  </pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The range of kernel version numbers that can be specified in <tt>LD_ASSUME_KERNEL</tt>
 is subject to some limits. In several common distributions that supply 
both NPTL and LinuxThreads, specifying the version number as 2.2.5 is 
sufficient to ensure the use of LinuxThreads. For a fuller description 
of the use of this environment variable, see http://people.redhat.com/drepper/assumekernel.html.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
