<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>33.7. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">33.7. Summary</h3><p class="docText">Threads
 don’t mix well with signals; multithreaded application designs should 
avoid the use of signals whenever possible. If a multithreaded 
application must deal with asynchronous signals, usually the cleanest 
way to do so is to block signals in all threads, and have a single 
dedicated thread that accepts incoming signals using <span class="docEmphasis">sigwait()</span>
 (or similar). This thread can then safely perform tasks such as 
modifying shared variables (under mutex control) and calling 
non-async-signal-safe functions.</p><p class="docText">Two
 threading implementations are commonly available on Linux: LinuxThreads
 and NPTL. LinuxThreads has been available on Linux for many years, but 
there are a number of points where it doesn’t conform to the 
requirements of SUSv3 and it is now obsolete. The more recent NPTL 
implementation provides closer SUSv3 conformance and superior 
performance, and is the implementation provided in modern Linux 
distributions.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ELDFK">33.7.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EPDFK">33.7.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">Refer to the sources of further information listed in Section 29.10.</p><p class="docText">The author of LinuxThreads documented the implementation in a web page that can be found at http://pauillac.inria.fr/~xleroy/linuxthreads/. The NPTL implementation is described by its implementers in a (now somewhat out-of-date) paper that is available online at http://people.redhat.com/drepper/nptl-design.pdf.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
