<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>34.2. Process Groups</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">34.2. Process Groups</h3><p class="docText">Each
 process has a numeric process group ID that defines the process group 
to which it belongs. A new process inherits its parent’s process group 
ID. A process can obtain its process group ID using <span class="docEmphasis">getpgrp()</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

pid_t <b>getpgrp</b>(void)</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Always successfully returns process group ID of calling process</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If the value returned by <span class="docEmphasis">getpgrp()</span> matches the caller’s process ID, this process is the leader of its process group.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">setpgid()</span> system call changes the process group of the process whose process ID is <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> to the value specified in <span class="docEmphasis">pgid</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

int <b>setpgid</b>(pid_t <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>, pid_t <span class="docEmphasis">pgid</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> is specified as 0, the calling process’s process group ID is changed. If <span class="docEmphasis">pgid</span> is specified as 0, then the process group ID of the process specified by <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> is made the same as its process ID. Thus, the following <span class="docEmphasis">setpgid()</span> calls are equivalent:</p><pre>setpgid(0, 0);
setpgid(getpid(), 0);
setpgid(getpid(), getpid());</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If the <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">pgid</span> arguments specify the same process (i.e., <span class="docEmphasis">pgid</span> is 0 or matches the process ID of the process specified by <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>),
 then a new process group is created, and the specified process is made 
the leader of the new group (i.e., the process group ID of the process 
is made the same as its process ID). If the two arguments specify 
different values (i.e., <span class="docEmphasis">pgid</span> is not 0 and doesn’t match the process ID of the process specified by <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>), then <span class="docEmphasis">setpgid()</span> is being used to move a process between process groups.</p><p class="docText">The typical callers of <span class="docEmphasis">setpgid()</span> (and <span class="docEmphasis">setsid()</span>, described in Section 34.3) are programs such as the shell and <span class="docEmphasis">login(1)</span>. In Section 37.2, we’ll see that a program also calls <span class="docEmphasis">setsid()</span> as one of the steps on the way to becoming a daemon.</p><p class="docText">Several restrictions apply when calling <span class="docEmphasis">setpgid()</span>:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> argument may specify only the calling process or one of its children. Violation of this rule results in the error <tt>ESRCH</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">When moving a process between groups, the calling process and the process specified by <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>
 (which may be one and the same), as well as the target process group, 
must all be part of the same session. Violation of this rule results in 
the error <tt>EPERM</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> argument may not specify a process that is a session leader. Violation of this rule results in the error <tt>EPERM</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A process may not change the process group ID of one of its children after that child has performed an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>. Violation of this rule results in the error <tt>EACCES</tt>.
 The rationale for this constraint is that it could confuse a program if
 its process group ID were changed after it had commenced.</p></li></ul><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EMMFK">34.2.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EQMFK">34.2.1.1. Using <span class="docEmphasis">setpgid()</span> in a job-control shell</h5><p class="docText">The restriction that a process may not change the process group ID of one of its children after that child has performed an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> affects the programming of job-control shells, which have the following requirements:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">All
 of the processes in a job (i.e., a command or a pipeline) must be 
placed in a single process group. (We can see the desired result by 
looking at the two process groups created by <span class="docEmphasis">bash</span> in Figure 34-1.) This step permits the shell to use <span class="docEmphasis">killpg()</span> (or, equivalently, <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span> with a negative <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>
 argument) to simultaneously send job-control signals to all of the 
members of the process group. Naturally, this step must be carried out 
before any job-control signals are sent.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Each
 of the child processes must be transferred to the process group before 
it execs a program, since the program itself is ignorant of 
manipulations of the process group ID.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">For each process in the job, either the parent or the child could use <span class="docEmphasis">setpgid()</span> to change the process group ID of the child. However, because the scheduling of the parent and child is indeterminate after a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> (Section 24.4), we can’t rely on the parent changing the child’s process group ID before the child does an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>;
 nor can we rely on the child changing its process group ID before the 
parent tries to send any job-control signals to it. (Dependence on 
either one of these behaviors would result in a race condition.) 
Therefore, job-control shells are programmed so that the parent and the 
child process both call <span class="docEmphasis">setpgid()</span> to change the child’s process group ID to the same value immediately after a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, and the parent ignores any occurrence of the <tt>EACCES</tt> error on the <span class="docEmphasis">setpgid()</span> call. In other words, in a job-control shell, we’ll find code something like that shown in Example 34-1.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EPOFK">Example 34-1. How a job-control shell sets the process group ID of a child process</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre>pid_t childPid;
    pid_t pipelinePgid;         /* PGID to which processes in a pipeline
                                    are to be assigned */
    /* Other code */

    childPid = fork();
    switch (childPid) {
    case -1: /* fork() failed */
        /* Handle error */

    case 0: /* Child */
        if (setpgid(0, pipelinePgid) == -1)
            /* Handle error */
        /* Child carries on to exec the required program */

    default: /* Parent (shell) */
        if (setpgid(childPid, pipelinePgid) == -1 &amp;&amp; errno != EACCES)
            /* Handle error */
        /* Parent carries on to do other things */
    }</pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">Things are slightly more complex than shown in Example 34-1,
 since, when creating the processes for a pipeline, the parent shell 
records the process ID of the first process in the pipeline and uses 
this as the process group ID (<span class="docEmphasis">pipelinePgid</span>) for all of the processes in the group.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E4OFK">34.2.1.2. Other (obsolete) interfaces for retrieving and modifying process group IDs</h5><p class="docText">The different suffixes in the names of the <span class="docEmphasis">getpgrp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">setpgid()</span> system calls deserve explanation.</p><p class="docText">In the beginning, 4.2BSD provided a <span class="docEmphasis">getprgp(pid)</span> system call that returned the process group ID of the process specified by <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>. In practice, <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>
 was always used to specify the calling process. Consequently, the POSIX
 committee deemed the call to be more complex than necessary, and 
instead adopted the System V <span class="docEmphasis">getpgrp()</span> call, which took no arguments and returned the process group ID of the calling process.</p><p class="docText">In order to change the process group ID, 4.2BSD provided the call <span class="docEmphasis">setpgrp(pid, pgid)</span>, which operated in a similar manner to <span class="docEmphasis">setpgid()</span>. The principal difference was that the BSD <span class="docEmphasis">setpgrp()</span> could be used to set the process group ID to any value. (We noted earlier that <span class="docEmphasis">setpgid()</span>
 can’t transfer a process into a process group in a different session.) 
This resulted in some security issues and was also more flexible than 
required for implementing job control. Consequently, the POSIX committee
 settled on a more restrictive function and gave it the name <span class="docEmphasis">setpgid()</span>.</p><p class="docText">To further complicate matters, SUSv3 specifies <span class="docEmphasis">getpgid(pid)</span>, with the same semantics as the old BSD <span class="docEmphasis">getpgrp()</span>, and also weakly specifies an alternative, System V-derived version of <span class="docEmphasis">setpgrp()</span>, taking no arguments, as being approximately equivalent to <span class="docEmphasis">setpgid(0, 0)</span>.</p><p class="docText">Although the <span class="docEmphasis">setpgid()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getpgrp()</span>
 system calls that we described earlier are sufficient for implementing 
shell job control, Linux, like most other UNIX implementations, also 
provides <span class="docEmphasis">getpgid(pid)</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">setpgrp(void)</span>. For backward compatibility, many BSD-derived implementations continue to provide <span class="docEmphasis">setprgp(pid, pgid)</span> as a synonym for <span class="docEmphasis">setpgid(pid, pgid)</span>.</p><p class="docText">If we explicitly define the <tt>_BSD_SOURCE</tt> feature test macro when compiling a program, then <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> provides the BSD-derived versions of <span class="docEmphasis">setpgrp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getpgrp()</span>, instead of the default versions.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
