<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>34.3. Sessions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">34.3. Sessions</h3><p class="docText">A <span class="docEmphasis">session</span>
 is a collection of process groups. The session membership of a process 
is defined by its numeric session ID. A new process inherits its 
parent’s session ID. The <span class="docEmphasis">getsid()</span> system call returns the session ID of the process specified by <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>.</p><pre>#define _XOPEN_SOURCE 500
#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

pid_t <b>getsid</b>(pid_t <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns session ID of specified process, or <span class="docEmphasis">(pid_t)</span> -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> is specified as 0, <span class="docEmphasis">getsid()</span> returns the session ID of the calling process.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On a few UNIX implementations (e.g., HP-UX 11), <span class="docEmphasis">getsid()</span>
 can be used to retrieve the session ID of a process only if it is in 
the same session as the calling process. (SUSv3 permits this 
possibility.) In other words, the call merely serves, by its success or 
failure (<tt>EPERM</tt>), to inform us if the 
specified process is in the same session as the caller. This restriction
 doesn’t apply on Linux or on most other implementations.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If the calling process is not a process group leader, <span class="docEmphasis">setsid()</span> creates a new session.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

pid_t <b>setsid</b>(void);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns session ID of new session, or <span class="docEmphasis">(pid_t)</span> -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">setsid()</span> system call creates a new session as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The
 calling process becomes the leader of a new session, ands is made the 
leader of a new process group within that session. The calling process’s
 process group ID and session ID are set to the same value as its 
process ID.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The calling process has no controlling terminal. Any previously existing connection to a controlling terminal is broken.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">If the calling process is a process group leader, <span class="docEmphasis">setsid()</span> fails with the error <tt>EPERM</tt>. The simplest way of ensuring that this doesn’t happen is to perform a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> and have the parent exit while the child carries on to call <span class="docEmphasis">setsid()</span>.
 Since the child inherits its parent’s process group ID and receives its
 own unique process ID, it can’t be a process group leader.</p><p class="docText">The restriction against a process group leader being able to call <span class="docEmphasis">setsid()</span>
 is necessary because, without it, the process group leader would be 
able to place itself in another (new) session, while other members of 
the process group remained in the original session. (A new process group
 would not be created, since, by definition, the process group leader’s 
process group ID is already the same as its process ID.) This would 
violate the strict two-level hierarchy of sessions and process groups, 
whereby all members of a process group must be part of the same session.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">When a new process is created via <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>,
 the kernel ensures not only that it has a unique process ID, but also 
that the process ID doesn’t match the process group ID or session ID of 
any existing process. Thus, even if the leader of a process group or a 
session has exited, a new process can’t reuse the leader’s process ID 
and thereby accidentally become the leader of an existing session or 
process group.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Example 34-2 demonstrates the use of <span class="docEmphasis">setsid()</span> to create a new session. To check that it no longer has a controlling terminal, this program attempts to open the special file <tt>/dev/tty</tt> (described in the next section). When we run this program, we see the following:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>ps -p $$ -o 'pid pgid sid command' </b>            <i> $$ is PID of shell</i>
  PID  PGID   SID COMMAND
12243 12243 12243 bash                          <i> PID, PGID, and SID of shell</i>
$ <b>./t_setsid </b>
$ PID=12352, PGID=12352, SID=12352
ERROR [ENXIO Device not configured] open /dev/tty

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">As can be seen from the 
output, the process successfully places itself in a new process group 
within a new session. Since this session has no controlling terminal, 
the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>
 call fails. (In the penultimate line of program output above, we see a 
shell prompt mixed with the program output, because the shell notices 
that the parent process has exited after the <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> call, and so prints its next prompt before the child has completed.)</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EIOFK">Example 34-2. Creating a new session</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre><b>pgsjc/t_setsid.c</b>
#define _XOPEN_SOURCE 500
#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;
#include &lt;fcntl.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    if (fork() != 0)            /* Exit if parent, or on error */
        _exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);

    if (setsid() == -1)
        errExit("setsid");

    printf("PID=%ld, PGID=%ld, SID=%ld\n", (long) getpid(),
            (long) getpgrp(), (long) getsid(0));

    if (open("/dev/tty", O_RDWR) == -1)
        errExit("open /dev/tty");
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>pgsjc/t_setsid.c</b></pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
