<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>34.4. Controlling Terminals and Controlling Processes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">34.4. Controlling Terminals and Controlling Processes</h3><p class="docText">All
 of the processes in a session may have a (single) controlling terminal.
 Upon creation, a session has no controlling terminal; the controlling 
terminal is established when the session leader first opens a terminal 
that is not already the controlling terminal for a session, unless the <tt>O_NOCTTY</tt> flag is specified when calling <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>. A terminal may be the controlling terminal for at most one session.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">SUSv3 specifies the function <span class="docEmphasis">tcgetsid(int fd)</span> (prototyped in <tt>&lt;termios.h&gt;</tt>), which returns the ID of the session associated with the controlling terminal specified by <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>. This function is provided in <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> (where it is implemented using the <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> <tt>TIOCGSID</tt> operation).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The controlling terminal is inherited by the child of a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> and preserved across an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>.</p><p class="docText">When
 a session leader opens a controlling terminal, it simultaneously 
becomes the controlling process for the terminal. If a terminal 
disconnect subsequently occurs, the kernel sends the controlling process
 a <tt>SIGHUP</tt> signal to inform it of this event. We go into further detail on this point in Section 34.6.2.</p><p class="docText">If a process has a controlling terminal, opening the special file <tt>/dev/tty</tt>
 obtains a file descriptor for that terminal. This is useful if standard
 input and output are redirected, and a program wants to ensure that it 
is communicating with the controlling terminal. For example, the <span class="docEmphasis">getpass()</span> function described in Section 8.5 opens <tt>/dev/tty</tt> for this purpose. If the process doesn’t have a controlling terminal, opening <tt>/dev/tty</tt> fails with the error <tt>ENXIO</tt>.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDNFK">34.4.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EHNFK">34.4.1.1. Removing a process’s association with the controlling terminal</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl(fd, TIOCNOTTY)</span> operation can be used to remove a process’s association with its controlling terminal, specified via the file descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>. After this call, attempts to open <tt>/dev/tty</tt> will fail. (Although not specified in SUSv3, the <tt>TIOCNOTTY</tt> operation is supported on most UNIX implementations.)</p><p class="docText">If the calling process is the controlling process for the terminal, then as for the termination of the controlling process (Section 34.6.2), the following steps occur:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">All processes in the session lose their association with the controlling terminal.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The
 controlling terminal loses its association with the session, and can 
therefore be acquired as the controlling process by another session 
leader.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The kernel sends a <tt>SIGHUP</tt> signal (and a <tt>SIGCONT</tt> signal) to all members of the foreground process group, to inform them of the loss of the controlling terminal.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EOQFK">34.4.1.2. Establishing a controlling terminal on BSD</h5><p class="docText">SUSv3 leaves the manner in which a session acquires a controlling terminal unspecified, merely stating that specifying the <tt>O_NOCTTY</tt>
 flag when opening a terminal guarantees that the terminal won’t become a
 controlling terminal for the session. The Linux semantics that we have 
described above derive from System V.</p><p class="docText">On
 BSD systems, opening a terminal in the session leader never causes the 
terminal to become a controlling terminal, regardless of whether the <tt>O_NOCTTY</tt> flag is specified. Instead, the session leader uses the <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> <tt>TIOCSCTTY</tt> operation to explicitly establish the terminal referred to by the file descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span> as the controlling terminal:</p><pre>if (ioctl(fd, TIOCSCTTY) == -1)
    errExit("ioctl");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This operation can be performed only if the session doesn’t already have a controlling terminal.</p><p class="docText">The <tt>TIOCSCTTY</tt> operation is also available on Linux, but it is not widespread on other (non-BSD) implementations.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EMRFK">34.4.1.3. Obtaining a pathname that refers to the controlling terminal: <span class="docEmphasis">ctermid()</span></h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">ctermid()</span> function returns a pathname referring to the controlling terminal.</p><pre>#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;            /* Defines L_ctermid constant */

char *<b>ctermid</b>(char *<span class="docEmphasis">ttyname</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns pointer to string containing pathname of controlling terminal, or <tt>NULL</tt> if pathname could not be determined</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">ctermid()</span>
 function returns the controlling terminal’s pathname in two different 
ways: via the function result and via the buffer pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">ttyname</span>.</p><p class="docText">If <span class="docEmphasis">ttyname</span> is not <tt>NULL</tt>, then it should be a buffer of at least <tt>L_ctermid</tt>
 bytes, and the pathname is copied into this array. In this case, the 
function return value is also a pointer to this buffer. If <span class="docEmphasis">ttyname</span> is <tt>NULL</tt>, <span class="docEmphasis">ctermid()</span> returns a pointer to a statically allocated buffer containing the pathname. When <span class="docEmphasis">ttyname</span> is <tt>NULL</tt>, <span class="docEmphasis">ctermid()</span> is not reentrant.</p><p class="docText">On Linux and other UNIX implementations, <span class="docEmphasis">ctermid()</span> typically yields the string <tt>/dev/tty</tt>. The purpose of this function is to ease portability to non-UNIX systems.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
