<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>34.5. Foreground and Background Process Groups</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">34.5. Foreground and Background Process Groups</h3><p class="docText">The
 controlling terminal maintains the notion of a foreground process 
group. Within a session, only one process group can be in the foreground
 at a particular moment; all of the other process groups in the session 
are background process groups. The foreground process group is the only 
process group that can freely read and write on the controlling 
terminal. When one of the signal-generating terminal characters is typed
 on the controlling terminal, the terminal driver delivers the 
corresponding signal to the members of the foreground process group. We 
describe further details in Section 34.7.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In
 theory, situations can arise where a session has no foreground process 
group. This could happen, for example, if all processes in the 
foreground process group terminate, and no other process notices this 
fact and moves itself into the foreground. In practice, such situations 
are rare. Normally, the shell is the process monitoring the status of 
the foreground process group, and it moves itself back into the 
foreground when it notices (via <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span>) that the foreground process group has terminated.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">tcgetpgrp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">tcsetpgrp()</span>
 functions respectively retrieve and change the process group of a 
terminal. These functions are used primarily by job-control shells.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

pid_t <b>tcgetpgrp</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns process group ID of terminal’s foreground process group, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><pre>int <b>tcsetpgrp</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, pid_t <span class="docEmphasis">pgid</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">tcgetpgrp()</span> function returns the process group ID of the foreground process group of the terminal referred to by the file descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, which must be the controlling terminal of the calling process.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">If there is no foreground process group for this terminal, <span class="docEmphasis">tcgetpgrp()</span>
 returns a value greater than 1 that doesn’t match the ID of any 
existing process group. (This is the behavior specified by SUSv3.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">tcsetpgrp()</span>
 function changes the foreground process group for a terminal. If the 
calling process has a controlling terminal, and the file descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span> refers to that terminal, then <span class="docEmphasis">tcsetpgrp()</span> sets the foreground process group of the terminal to the value specified in <span class="docEmphasis">pgid</span>, which must match the process group ID of one of the processes in the calling process’s session.</p><p class="docText">Both <span class="docEmphasis">tcgetpgrp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">tcsetpgrp()</span>
 are standardized in SUSv3. On Linux, as on many other UNIX 
implementations, these functions are implemented using two 
unstandardized <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> operations: <tt>TIOCGPGRP</tt> and <tt>TIOCSPGRP</tt>.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
