<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>34.8. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">34.8. Summary</h3><p class="docText">Sessions
 and process groups (also known as jobs) form a two-level hierarchy of 
processes: a session is a collection of process groups, and a process 
group is a collection of processes. A session leader is the process that
 created the session using <span class="docEmphasis">setsid()</span>. Similarly, a process group leader is the process that created the group using <span class="docEmphasis">setpgid()</span>.
 All of the members of a process group share the same process group ID 
(which is the same as the process ID of the process group leader), and 
all processes in the process groups that constitute a session have the 
same session ID (which is the same as the process ID of the session 
leader). Each session may have a controlling terminal (<tt>/dev/tty</tt>),
 which is established when the session leader opens a terminal device. 
Opening the controlling terminal also causes the session leader to 
become the controlling process for the terminal.</p><p class="docText">Sessions
 and process groups were defined to support shell job control (although 
occasionally they find other uses in applications). Under job control, 
the shell is the session leader and controlling process for the terminal
 on which it is running. Each job (a simple command or a pipeline) 
executed by the shell is created as a separate process group, and the 
shell provides commands to move a job between three states: running in 
the foreground, running in the background, and stopped in the 
background.</p><p class="docText">To support job 
control, the terminal driver maintains a record of the foreground 
process group (job) for the controlling terminal. The terminal driver 
delivers job-control signals to the foreground job when certain 
characters are typed. These signals either terminate or stop the 
foreground job.</p><p class="docText">The notion 
of the terminal’s foreground job is also used to arbitrate terminal I/O 
requests. Only processes in the foreground job may read from the 
controlling terminal. Background jobs are prevented from reading by 
delivery of the <tt>SIGTTIN</tt> signal, whose default action is to stop the job. If the terminal <tt>TOSTOP</tt> is set, then background jobs are also prevented from writing to the controlling terminal by delivery of a <tt>SIGTTOU</tt> signal, whose default action is to stop the job.</p><p class="docText">When a terminal disconnect occurs, the kernel delivers a <tt>SIGHUP</tt> signal to the controlling process to inform it of the fact. Such an event may result in a chain reaction whereby a <tt>SIGHUP</tt>
 signal is delivered to many other processes. First, if the controlling 
process is a shell (as is typically the case), then, before terminating,
 the shell sends <tt>SIGHUP</tt> to each of the process groups it has created. Second, if delivery of <tt>SIGHUP</tt> results in termination of a controlling process, then the kernel also sends <tt>SIGHUP</tt> to all of the members of the foreground process group of the controlling terminal.</p><p class="docText">In
 general, applications don’t need to be cognizant of job-control 
signals. One exception is when a program performs screen-handling 
operations. Such programs need to correctly handle the <tt>SIGTSTP</tt>
 signal, resetting terminal attributes to sane values before the process
 is suspended, and restoring the correct (application-specific) terminal
 attributes when the application is once more resumed following delivery
 of a <tt>SIGCONT</tt> signal.</p><p class="docText">A
 process group is considered to be orphaned if none of its member 
processes has a parent in a different process group in the same session.
 Orphaned process groups are significant because there is no process 
outside the group that can both monitor the state of any stopped 
processes within the group and is always allowed to send a <tt>SIGCONT</tt>
 signal to these stopped processes in order to restart them. This could 
result in such stopped processes languishing forever on the system. To 
avoid this possibility, when a process group with stopped member 
processes becomes orphaned, all members of the process group are sent a <tt>SIGHUP</tt> signal, followed by a <tt>SIGCONT</tt> signal, to notify them that they have become orphaned and ensure that they are restarted.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENXFK">34.8.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ERXFK">34.8.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">Chapter 9
 of [Stevens &amp; Rago, 2005] covers similar material to this chapter, 
and includes a description of the steps that occur during login to 
establish the session for a login shell. The <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>
 manual contains a lengthy description of the functions relating to job 
control and the implementation of job control within the shell. The 
SUSv3 rationale contains an extensive discussion of sessions, process 
groups, and job control.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
