<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>34.9. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">34.9. Exercises</h3><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Suppose a parent process performs the following steps:</p><pre>/* Call fork() to create a number of child processes, each of which
   remains in same process group as the parent */

/* Sometime later... */
signal(SIGUSR1, SIG_IGN);     /* Parent makes itself immune to SIGUSR1 */

killpg(getpgrp(), SIGUSR1);   /* Send signal to children created earlier */</pre><br/>
<p class="docList">What problem might be encountered with this application design? (Consider shell pipelines.) How could this problem be avoided?</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write
 a program to verify that a parent process can change the process group 
ID of one of its children before the child performs an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, but not afterward.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write a program to verify that a call to <span class="docEmphasis">setsid()</span> from a process group leader fails.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Modify the program in Example 34-4 (<tt>disc_SIGHUP.c</tt>) to verify that, if the controlling process doesn’t terminate as a consequence of receiving <tt>SIGHUP</tt>, then the kernel doesn’t send <tt>SIGHUP</tt> to the members of the foreground process.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Suppose that, in the signal handler of Example 34-6, the code that unblocks the <tt>SIGTSTP</tt> signal was moved to the start of the handler. What potential race condition does this create?</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write a program to verify that when a process in an orphaned process group attempts to <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> from the controlling terminal, the <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> fails with the error <tt>EIO</tt>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write a program to verify that if one of the signals <tt>SIGTTIN</tt>, <tt>SIGTTOU</tt>, or <tt>SIGTSTP</tt>
 is sent to a member of an orphaned process group, then the signal is 
discarded (i.e., has no effect) if it would stop the process (i.e., the 
disposition is <tt>SIG_DFL</tt>), but is delivered if a handler is installed for the signal.</p></div></li></ol></div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
