<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>35.2. Overview of Realtime Process Scheduling</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">35.2. Overview of Realtime Process Scheduling</h3><p class="docText">The
 standard kernel scheduling algorithm usually provides adequate 
performance and responsiveness for the mixture of interactive and 
background processes typically run on a system. However, realtime 
applications have more stringent requirements of a scheduler, including 
the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">A
 realtime application must provide a guaranteed maximum response time 
for external inputs. In many cases, these guaranteed maximum response 
times must be quite small (e.g., of the order of a fraction of a 
second). For example, a slow response by a vehicle navigation system 
could be catastrophic. To satisfy this requirement, the kernel must 
provide the facility for a high-priority process to obtain control of 
the CPU in a timely fashion, preempting any process that may currently 
be running.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">A
 time-critical application may need to take other steps to avoid 
unacceptable delays. For example, to avoid being delayed by a page 
fault, an application can lock all of its virtual memory into RAM using <span class="docEmphasis">mlock()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">mlockall()</span> (described in Section 50.2).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li><li><p class="docList">A
 high-priority process should be able to maintain exclusive access to 
the CPU until it completes or voluntarily relinquishes the CPU.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A realtime application should be able to control the precise order in which its component processes are scheduled.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">SUSv3
 specifies a realtime process scheduling API (originally defined in 
POSIX.1b) that partly addresses these requirements. This API provides 
two realtime scheduling policies: <tt>SCHED_RR</tt> and <tt>SCHED_FIFO</tt>.
 Processes operating under either of these policies always have priority
 over processes scheduled using the standard round-robin time-sharing 
policy described in Section 35.1, which the realtime scheduling API identifies using the constant <tt>SCHED_OTHER</tt>.</p><p class="docText">Each
 of the realtime policies allows for a range of priority levels. SUSv3 
requires that an implementation provide at least 32 discrete priorities 
for the realtime policies. In each scheduling policy, runnable processes
 with higher priority always have precedence over lower-priority 
processes when seeking access to the CPU.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The
 statement that runnable processes with higher priority always have 
precedence over lower-priority processes needs to be qualified for 
multiprocessor Linux systems (including hyperthreaded systems). On a 
multiprocessor system, each CPU has a separate run queue (this provides 
better performance than a single system-wide run queue), and processes 
are prioritized only per CPU run queue. For example, on a dual-processor
 system with three processes, process A with realtime priority 20 could 
be queued waiting for CPU 0, which is currently running process B with 
priority 30, even though CPU 1 is running process C with a priority of 
10.</p><p class="docText">Realtime applications that employ multiple processes (or threads) can use the CPU affinity API described in Section 35.4
 to avoid any problems that might result from this scheduling behavior. 
For example, on a four-processor system, all noncritical processes could
 be isolated onto a single CPU, leaving the other three CPUs available 
for use by the application.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Linux
 provides 99 realtime priority levels, numbered 1 (lowest) to 99 
(highest), and this range applies in both realtime scheduling policies. 
The priorities in each policy are equivalent. This means that, given two
 processes with the same priority, one operating under the <tt>SCHED_RR</tt> policy and the other under <tt>SCHED_FIFO</tt>,
 either may be the next one eligible for execution, depending on the 
order in which they were scheduled. In effect, each priority level 
maintains a queue of runnable processes, and the next process to run is 
selected from the front of the highest-priority nonempty queue.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EV1FK">35.2.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EZ1FK">35.2.1.1. POSIX realtime versus hard realtime</h5><p class="docText">Applications with all of the requirements listed at the start of this section are sometimes referred to as <span class="docEmphasis">hard</span>
 realtime applications. However, the POSIX realtime process scheduling 
API doesn’t satisfy all of these requirements. In particular, it 
provides no way for an application to guarantee response times for 
handling input. To make such guarantees requires operating system 
features that are not part of the mainline Linux kernel (nor most other 
standard operating systems). The POSIX API merely provides us with 
so-called <span class="docEmphasis">soft</span> realtime, allowing us to control which processes are scheduled for use of the CPU.</p><p class="docText">Adding
 support for hard realtime applications is difficult to achieve without 
imposing an overhead on the system that conflicts with the performance 
requirements of the time-sharing applications that form the majority of 
applications on typical desktop and server systems. This is why most 
UNIX kernels—including, historically, Linux—have not natively supported 
realtime applications. Nevertheless, starting from around version 
2.6.18, various features have been added to the Linux kernel with the 
eventual aim of allowing Linux to natively provide full support for hard
 realtime applications, without imposing the aforementioned overhead for
 time-sharing operation.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ET2FK">35.2.2. The <tt>SCHED_RR</tt> Policy</h4><p class="docText">Under the <tt>SCHED_RR</tt>
 (round-robin) policy, processes of equal priority are executed in a 
round-robin time-sharing fashion. A process receives a fixed-length time
 slice each time it uses the CPU. Once scheduled, a process employing 
the <tt>SCHED_RR</tt> policy maintains control of the CPU until either:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">it reaches the end of its time slice;</p></li><li><p class="docList">it voluntarily relinquishes the CPU, either by performing a blocking system call or by calling the <span class="docEmphasis">sched_yield()</span> system call (described in Section 35.3.3);</p></li><li><p class="docList">it terminates; or</p></li><li><p class="docList">it is preempted by a higher-priority process.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">For the first two events above, when a process running under the <tt>SCHED_RR</tt>
 policy loses access to the CPU, it is placed at the back of the queue 
for its priority level. In the final case, when the higher-priority 
process has ceased execution, the preempted process continues execution,
 consuming the remainder of its time slice (i.e., the preempted process 
remains at the head of the queue for its priority level).</p><p class="docText">In both the <tt>SCHED_RR</tt> and the <tt>SCHED_FIFO</tt> policies, the currently running process may be preempted for one of the following reasons:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">a higher-priority process that was blocked became unblocked (e.g., an I/O operation on which it was waiting completed);</p></li><li><p class="docList">the priority of another process was raised to a higher level than the currently running process; or</p></li><li><p class="docList">the priority of the currently running process was decreased to a lower value than that of some other runnable process.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The <tt>SCHED_RR</tt> policy is similar to the standard round-robin time-sharing scheduling algorithm (<tt>SCHED_OTHER</tt>),
 in that it allows a group of processes with the same priority to share 
access to the CPU. The most notable difference is the existence of 
strictly distinct priority levels, with higher-priority processes always
 taking precedence over lower-priority processes. By contrast, a low 
nice value (i.e., high priority) doesn’t give a process exclusive access
 to the CPU; it merely gives the process a favorable weighting in 
scheduling decisions. As noted in Section 35.1,
 a process with a low priority (i.e., high nice value) always receives 
at least some CPU time. The other important difference is that the <tt>SCHED_RR</tt> policy allows us to precisely control the order in which processes are scheduled.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EP5FK">35.2.3. The <tt>SCHED_FIFO</tt> Policy</h4><p class="docText">The <tt>SCHED_FIFO</tt> (first-in, first-out) policy is similar to the <tt>SCHED_RR</tt> policy. The major difference is that there is no time slice. Once a <tt>SCHED_FIFO</tt> process gains access to the CPU, it executes until either:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">it voluntarily relinquishes the CPU (in the same manner as described for the <tt>SCHED_FIFO</tt> policy above);</p></li><li><p class="docList">it terminates; or</p></li><li><p class="docList">it is preempted by a higher-priority process (in the same circumstances as described for the <tt>SCHED_FIFO</tt> policy above).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">In
 the first case, the process is placed at the back of the queue for its 
priority level. In the last case, when the higher-priority process has 
ceased execution (by blocking or terminating), the preempted process 
continues execution (i.e., the preempted process remains at the head of 
the queue for its priority level).</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EX6FK">35.2.4. The <tt>SCHED_BATCH</tt> and <tt>SCHED_IDLE</tt> Policies</h4><p class="docText">The Linux 2.6 kernel series added two nonstandard scheduling policies: <tt>SCHED_BATCH</tt> and <tt>SCHED_IDLE</tt>. Although these policies are set via the POSIX realtime scheduling API, they are not actually realtime policies.</p><p class="docText">The <tt>SCHED_BATCH</tt> policy, added in kernel 2.6.16, is similar to the default <tt>SCHED_OTHER</tt> policy. The difference is that the <tt>SCHED_BATCH</tt>
 policy causes jobs that frequently wake up to be scheduled less often. 
This policy is intended for batch-style execution of processes.</p><p class="docText">The <tt>SCHED_IDLE</tt> policy, added in kernel 2.6.23, is also similar to <tt>SCHED_OTHER</tt>,
 but provides functionality equivalent to a very low nice value (i.e., 
lower than +19). The process nice value has no meaning for this policy. 
It is intended for running low-priority jobs that will receive a 
significant proportion of the CPU only if no other job on the system 
requires the CPU.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
