<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>35.3. Realtime Process Scheduling API</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">35.3. Realtime Process Scheduling API</h3><p class="docText">We
 now look at the various system calls constituting the realtime process 
scheduling API. These system calls allow us to control process 
scheduling policies and priorities.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Although
 realtime scheduling has been a part of Linux since version 2.0 of the 
kernel, several problems persisted for a long time in the 
implementation. A number of features of the implementation remained 
broken in the 2.2 kernel, and even in early 2.4 kernels. Most of these 
problems were rectified by about kernel 2.4.20.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EPZFK">35.3.1. Realtime Priority Ranges</h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sched_get_priority_min()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sched_get_priority_max()</span> system calls return the available priority range for a scheduling policy.</p><pre>#include &lt;sched.h&gt;

int <b>sched_get_priority_min</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">policy</span>);
int <b>sched_get_priority_max</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">policy</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Both return nonnegative integer priority on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">For both system calls, <span class="docEmphasis">policy</span> specifies the scheduling policy about which we wish to obtain information. For this argument, we specify either <tt>SCHED_RR</tt> or <tt>SCHED_FIFO</tt>. The <span class="docEmphasis">sched_get_priority_min()</span> system call returns the minimum priority for the specified policy, and <span class="docEmphasis">sched_get_priority_max()</span> returns the maximum priority. On Linux, these system calls return the numbers 1 and 99, respectively, for both the <tt>SCHED_RR</tt> and <tt>SCHED_FIFO</tt> policies. In other words, the priority ranges of the two realtime policies completely coincide, and <tt>SCHED_RR</tt> and <tt>SCHED_FIFO</tt>
 processes with the same priority are equally eligible for scheduling. 
(Which one is scheduled first depends on their order in the queue for 
that priority level.)</p><p class="docText">The
 range of realtime priorities differs from one UNIX implementation to 
another. Therefore, instead of hard-coding priority values into an 
application, we should specify priorities relative to the return value 
from one of these functions. Thus, the lowest <tt>SCHED_RR</tt> priority would be specified as <span class="docEmphasis">sched_get_priority_min(SCHED_FIFO)</span>, the next higher priority as <span class="docEmphasis">sched_get_priority_min(SCHED_FIFO) + 1</span>, and so on.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">SUSv3 doesn’t require that the <tt>SCHED_RR</tt> and <tt>SCHED_FIFO</tt>
 policies use the same priority ranges, but they do so on most UNIX 
implementations. For example, on Solaris 8, the priority range for both 
policies is 0 to 59, and on FreeBSD 6.1, it is 0 to 31.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ED3FK">35.3.2. Modifying and Retrieving Policies and Priorities</h4><p class="docText">In this section, we look at the system calls that modify and retrieve scheduling policies and priorities.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E54FK">35.3.2.1. Modifying scheduling policies and priorities</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sched_setscheduler()</span> system call changes both the scheduling policy and the priority of the process whose process ID is specified in <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>. If <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> is specified as 0, the attributes of the calling process are changed.</p><pre>#include &lt;sched.h&gt;

int <b>sched_setscheduler</b>(pid_t <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">policy</span>,
 const struct sched_param *<span class="docEmphasis">param</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">param</span> argument is a pointer to a structure of the following form:</p><pre>struct sched_param {
     int sched_priority;        /* Scheduling priority */
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">SUSv3 defines the <span class="docEmphasis">param</span>
 argument as a structure to allow an implementation to include 
additional implementation-specific fields, which may be useful if an 
implementation provides additional scheduling policies. However, like 
most UNIX implementations, Linux provides just the <span class="docEmphasis">sched_priority</span> field, which specifies the scheduling priority. For the <tt>SCHED_RR</tt> and <tt>SCHED_FIFO</tt> policies, this must be a value in the range indicated by <span class="docEmphasis">sched_get_priority_min()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sched_get_priority_max()</span>; for other policies, the priority must be 0.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">policy</span> argument determines the scheduling policy for the process. It is specified as one of the policies shown in Table 35-1.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 35-1. Linux realtime and nonrealtime scheduling policies</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Policy</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Description</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">SUSv3</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SCHED_FIFO</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Realtime first-in first-out</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SCHED_RR</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Realtime round-robin</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SCHED_OTHER</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Standard round-robin time-sharing</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SCHED_BATCH</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Similar to <tt>SCHED_OTHER</tt>, but intended for batch execution (since Linux 2.6.16)</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SCHED_IDLE</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Similar to <tt>SCHED_OTHER</tt>, but with priority even lower than nice value +19 (since Linux 2.6.23)</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">A successful <span class="docEmphasis">sched_setscheduler()</span> call moves the process specified by <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> to the back of the queue for its priority level.</p><p class="docText">SUSv3 specifies that the return value of a successful <span class="docEmphasis">sched_setscheduler()</span>
 call should be the previous scheduling policy. However, Linux deviates 
from the standard in that a successful call returns 0. A portable 
application should test for success by checking that the return status 
is not -1.</p><p class="docText">The scheduling policy and priority are inherited by a child created via <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, and they are preserved across an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sched_setparam()</span> system call provides a subset of the functionality of <span class="docEmphasis">sched_setscheduler()</span>. It modifies the scheduling priority of a process while leaving the policy unchanged.</p><pre>#include &lt;sched.h&gt;

int <b>sched_setparam</b>(pid_t <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>, const struct sched_param *<span class="docEmphasis">param</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">param</span> arguments are the same as for <span class="docEmphasis">sched_setscheduler()</span>.</p><p class="docText">A successful <span class="docEmphasis">sched_setparam()</span> call moves the process specified by <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> to the back of the queue for its priority level.</p><p class="docText">The program in Example 35-2 uses <span class="docEmphasis">sched_setscheduler()</span>
 to set the policy and priority of the processes specified by its 
command-line arguments. The first argument is a letter specifying a 
scheduling policy, the second is an integer priority, and the remaining 
arguments are the process IDs of the processes whose scheduling 
attributes are to be changed.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E1GGK">Example 35-2. Modifying process scheduling policies and priorities</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>procpri/sched_set.c</b>
#include &lt;sched.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int j, pol;
    struct sched_param sp;

    if (argc &lt; 3 || strchr("rfo", argv[1][0]) == NULL)
        usageErr("%s policy priority [pid...]\n"
                "    policy is 'r' (RR), 'f' (FIFO), "
#ifdef SCHED_BATCH              /* Linux-specific */
                "'b' (BATCH), "
#endif
#ifdef SCHED_IDLE               /* Linux-specific */
                "'i' (IDLE), "
#endif
                "or 'o' (OTHER)\n",
                argv[0]);

    pol = (argv[1][0] == 'r') ? SCHED_RR :
                (argv[1][0] == 'f') ? SCHED_FIFO :
#ifdef SCHED_BATCH
                (argv[1][0] == 'b') ? SCHED_BATCH :
#endif
#ifdef SCHED_IDLE
                (argv[1][0] == 'i') ? SCHED_IDLE :
#endif
                SCHED_OTHER;
    sp.sched_priority = getInt(argv[2], 0, "priority");

    for (j = 3; j &lt; argc; j++)
        if (sched_setscheduler(getLong(argv[j], 0, "pid"), pol, &amp;sp) == -1)
            errExit("sched_setscheduler");

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>procpri/sched_set.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EFHGK">35.3.2.2. Privileges and resource limits affecting changes to scheduling parameters</h5><p class="docText">In kernels before 2.6.12, a process generally must be privileged (<tt>CAP_SYS_NICE</tt>)
 to make changes to scheduling policies and priorities. The one 
exception to this requirement is that an unprivileged process can change
 the scheduling policy of a process to <tt>SCHED_OTHER</tt> if the effective user ID of the caller matches either the real or effective user ID of the target process.</p><p class="docText">Since
 kernel 2.6.12, the rules about setting realtime scheduling policies and
 priorities have changed with the introduction of a new, nonstandard 
resource limit, <tt>RLIMIT_RTPRIO</tt>. As with older kernels, privileged (<tt>CAP_SYS_NICE</tt>)
 processes can make arbitrary changes to the scheduling policy and 
priority of any process. However, an unprivileged process can also 
change scheduling policies and priorities, according to the following 
rules:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">If the process has a nonzero <tt>RLIMIT_RTPRIO</tt>
 soft limit, then it can make arbitrary changes to its scheduling policy
 and priority, subject to the constraint that the upper limit on the 
realtime priority that it may set is the maximum of its current realtime
 priority (if the process is currently operating under a realtime 
policy) and the value of its <tt>RLIMIT_RTPRIO</tt> soft limit.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If the value of a process’s <tt>RLIMIT_RTPRIO</tt>
 soft limit is 0, then the only change that it can make is to lower its 
realtime scheduling priority or to switch from a realtime policy to a 
nonrealtime policy.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>SCHED_IDLE</tt>
 policy is special. A process that is operating under this policy can’t 
make any changes to its policy, regardless of the value of the <tt>RLIMIT_RTPRIO</tt> resource limit.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Policy
 and priority changes can also be performed from another unprivileged 
process, as long as the effective user ID of that process matches either
 the real or effective user ID of the target process.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A process’s soft <tt>RLIMIT_RTPRIO</tt>
 limit determines only what changes can be made to its own scheduling 
policy and priority, either by the process itself or by another 
unprivileged process. A nonzero limit doesn’t give an unprivileged 
process the ability to change the scheduling policy and priority of 
other processes.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Starting with kernel 2.6.25, Linux adds the concept of realtime scheduling groups, configurable via the <tt>CONFIG_RT_GROUP_SCHED</tt>
 kernel option, which also affect the changes that can be made when 
setting realtime scheduling policies. See the kernel source file <tt>Documentation/scheduler/sched-rt-group.txt</tt> for details.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EHKGK">35.3.2.3. Retrieving scheduling policies and priorities</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sched_getscheduler()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sched_getparam()</span> system calls retrieve the scheduling policy and priority of a process.</p><pre>#include &lt;sched.h&gt;

int <b>sched_getscheduler</b>(pid_t <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns scheduling policy, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><pre>int <b>sched_getparam</b>(pid_t <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>, struct sched_param *<span class="docEmphasis">param</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">For both of these system calls, <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> specifies the ID of the process about which information is to be retrieved. If <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>
 is 0, information is retrieved about the calling process. Both system 
calls can be used by an unprivileged process to retrieve information 
about any process, regardless of credentials.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sched_getparam()</span> system call returns the realtime priority of the specified process in the <span class="docEmphasis">sched_priority</span> field of the <span class="docEmphasis">sched_param</span> structure pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">param</span>.</p><p class="docText">Upon successful execution, <span class="docEmphasis">sched_getscheduler()</span> returns one of the policies shown earlier in Table 35-1.</p><p class="docText">The program in Example 35-3 uses <span class="docEmphasis">sched_getscheduler()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sched_getparam()</span>
 to retrieve the policy and priority of all of the processes whose 
process IDs are given as command-line arguments. The following shell 
session demonstrates the use of this program, as well as the program in Example 35-2:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>su </b>                          <i> Assume privilege so we can set realtime policies</i>
Password:
# <b>sleep 100 &amp; </b>                 <i> Create a process</i>
[1] 2006
# <b>./sched_view 2006 </b>           <i> View initial policy and priority of</i>
 <span class="docEmphasis">sleep</span> <i> process</i>
2006: OTHER  0
# <b>./sched_set f 25 2006 </b>       <i> Switch process to</i>
SCHED_FIFO <i> policy, priority 25</i>
# <b>./sched_view 2006 </b>           <i> Verify change</i>
2006: FIFO  25

					  </pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EOPGK">Example 35-3. Retrieving process scheduling policies and priorities</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>procpri/sched_view.c</b>
#include &lt;sched.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int j, pol;
    struct sched_param sp;

    for (j = 1; j &lt; argc; j++) {
        pol = sched_getscheduler(getLong(argv[j], 0, "pid"));
        if (pol == -1)
            errExit("sched_getscheduler");

        if (sched_getparam(getLong(argv[j], 0, "pid"), &amp;sp) == -1)
            errExit("sched_getparam");

        printf("%s: %-5s %2d\n", argv[j],
                (pol == SCHED_OTHER) ? "OTHER" :
                (pol == SCHED_RR) ? "RR" :
                (pol == SCHED_FIFO) ? "FIFO" :
#ifdef SCHED_BATCH              /* Linux-specific */
                (pol == SCHED_BATCH) ? "BATCH" :
#endif
#ifdef SCHED_IDLE               /* Linux-specific */
                (pol == SCHED_IDLE) ? "IDLE" :
#endif
                "???", sp.sched_priority);
    }

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>procpri/sched_view.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EZPGK">35.3.2.4. Preventing realtime processes from locking up the system</h5><p class="docText">Since <tt>SCHED_RR</tt> and <tt>SCHED_FIFO</tt>
 processes preempt any lower-priority processes (e.g., the shell under 
which the program is run), when developing applications that use these 
policies, we need to be aware of the possibility that a runaway realtime
 process could lock up the system by hogging the CPU. Programmatically, 
there are a few of ways to avoid this possibility:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Establish a suitably low soft CPU time resource limit (<tt>RLIMIT_CPU</tt>, described in Section 36.3) using <span class="docEmphasis">setrlimit()</span>. If the process consumes too much CPU time, it will be sent a <tt>SIGXCPU</tt> signal, which kills the process by default.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Set an alarm timer using <span class="docEmphasis">alarm()</span>. If the process continues running for a wall clock time that exceeds the number of seconds specified in the <span class="docEmphasis">alarm()</span> call, then it will be killed by a <tt>SIGALRM</tt> signal.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Create
 a watchdog process that runs with a high realtime priority. This 
process can loop repeatedly, sleeping for a specified interval, and then
 waking and monitoring the status of other processes. Such monitoring 
could include measuring the value of the CPU time clock for each process
 (see the discussion of the <span class="docEmphasis">clock_getcpuclockid()</span> function in Section 23.5.3) and checking its scheduling policy and priority using <span class="docEmphasis">sched_getscheduler()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sched_getparam()</span>.
 If a process is deemed to be misbehaving, the watchdog thread could 
lower the process’s priority, or stop or terminate it by sending an 
appropriate signal.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Since kernel 2.6.25, Linux provides a nonstandard resource limit, <tt>RLIMIT_RTTIME</tt>,
 for controlling the amount of CPU time that can be consumed in a single
 burst by a process running under a realtime scheduling policy. 
Specified in microseconds, <tt>RLIMIT_RTTIME</tt>
 limits the amount of CPU time that the process may consume without 
performing a system call that blocks. When the process does perform such
 a call, the count of consumed CPU time is reset to 0. The count of 
consumed CPU time is not reset if the process is preempted by a 
higher-priority process, is scheduled off the CPU because its time slice
 expired (for a <tt>SCHED_RR</tt> process), or calls <span class="docEmphasis">sched_yield()</span> (Section 35.3.3). If the process reaches its limit of CPU time, then, as with <tt>RLIMIT_CPU</tt>, it will be sent a <tt>SIGXCPU</tt> signal, which kills the process by default.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The
 changes in kernel 2.6.25 can also help prevent runaway realtime 
processes from locking up the system. For details, see the kernel source
 file <tt>Documentation/scheduler/sched-rt-group.txt</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EKTGK">35.3.2.5. Preventing child processes from inheriting privileged scheduling policies</h5><p class="docText">Linux 2.6.32 added <tt>SCHED_RESET_ON_FORK</tt> as a value that can be specified in <span class="docEmphasis">policy</span> when calling <span class="docEmphasis">sched_setscheduler()</span>. This is a flag value that is ORed with one of the policies in Table 35-1. If this flag is set, then children that are created by this process using <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> do not inherit privileged scheduling policies and priorities. The rules are as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">If the calling process has a realtime scheduling policy (<tt>SCHED_RR</tt> or <tt>SCHED_FIFO</tt>), then the policy in child processes is reset to the standard round-robin time-sharing policy, <tt>SCHED_OTHER</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If the process has a negative (i.e., high) nice value, then the nice value in child processes is reset to 0.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The <tt>SCHED_RESET_ON_FORK</tt>
 flag was designed to be used in media-playback applications. It permits
 the creation of single processes that have realtime scheduling policies
 that can’t be passed to child processes. Using the <tt>SCHED_RESET_ON_FORK</tt> flag prevents the creation of fork bombs that try to evade the ceiling set by the <tt>RLIMIT_RTTIME</tt> resource limit by creating multiple children running under realtime scheduling policies.</p><p class="docText">Once the <tt>SCHED_RESET_ON_FORK</tt> flag has been enabled for a process, only a privileged process (<tt>CAP_SYS_NICE</tt>) can disable it. When a child process is created, its reset-on-fork flag is disabled.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6UGK">35.3.3. Relinquishing the CPU</h4><p class="docText">A realtime process may voluntarily relinquish the CPU in two ways: by invoking a system call that blocks the process (e.g., a <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> from a terminal) or by calling <span class="docEmphasis">sched_yield()</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;sched.h&gt;

int <b>sched_yield</b>(void);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The operation of <span class="docEmphasis">sched_yield()</span>
 is simple. If there are any other queued runnable processes at the same
 priority level as the calling process, then the calling process is 
placed at the back of the queue, and the process at the head of the 
queue is scheduled to use the CPU. If no other runnable processes are 
queued at this priority, then <span class="docEmphasis">sched_yield()</span> does nothing; the calling process simply continues using the CPU.</p><p class="docText">Although SUSv3 permits a possible error return from <span class="docEmphasis">sched_yield()</span>,
 this system call always succeeds on Linux, as well as on many other 
UNIX implementations. Portable applications should nevertheless always 
check for an error return.</p><p class="docText">The use of <span class="docEmphasis">sched_yield()</span> for nonrealtime processes is undefined.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EVXGK">35.3.4. The <tt>SCHED_RR</tt> Time Slice</h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sched_rr_get_interval()</span> system call enables us to find out the length of the time slice allocated to a <tt>SCHED_RR</tt> process each time it is granted use of the CPU.</p><pre>#include &lt;sched.h&gt;

int <b>sched_rr_get_interval</b>(pid_t <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>, struct timespec *<span class="docEmphasis">tp</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">As with the other process scheduling system calls, <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> identifies the process about which we want to obtain information, and specifying <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> as 0 means the calling process. The time slice is returned in the <span class="docEmphasis">timespec</span> structure pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">tp</span>:</p><pre>struct timespec {
    time_t tv_sec;          /* Seconds */
    long   tv_nsec;         /* Nanoseconds */
};</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On recent 2.6 kernels, the realtime round-robin time slice is 0.1 seconds.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
