<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>35.4. CPU Affinity</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">35.4. CPU Affinity</h3><p class="docText">When
 a process is rescheduled to run on a multiprocessor system, it doesn’t 
necessarily run on the same CPU on which it last executed. The usual 
reason it may run on another CPU is that the original CPU is already 
busy.</p><p class="docText">When
 a process changes CPUs, there is a performance impact: in order for a 
line of the process’s data to be loaded into the cache of the new CPU, 
it must first be invalidated (i.e., either discarded if it is 
unmodified, or flushed to main memory if it was modified), if present in
 the cache of the old CPU. (To prevent cache inconsistencies, 
multiprocessor architectures allow data to be kept in only one CPU cache
 at a time.) This invalidation costs execution time. Because of this 
performance impact, the Linux (2.6) kernel tries to ensure <span class="docEmphasis">soft</span> CPU affinity for a process—wherever possible, the process is rescheduled to run on the same CPU.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">A <span class="docEmphasis">cache line</span>
 is the cache analog of a page in a virtual memory management system. It
 is the size of the unit used for transfers between the CPU cache and 
main memory. Typical line sizes range from 32 to 128 bytes. For further 
information, see [Schimmel, 1994] and [Drepper, 2007].</p><p class="docText">One of the fields in the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/stat</tt> file displays the number of the CPU on which a process is currently executing or last executed. See the <span class="docEmphasis">proc(5)</span> manual page for details.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Sometimes, it is desirable to set <span class="docEmphasis">hard</span>
 CPU affinity for a process, so that it is explicitly restricted to 
always running on one, or a subset, of the available CPUs. Among the 
reasons we may want to do this are the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">We can avoid the performance impacts caused by invalidation of cached data.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If
 multiple threads (or processes) are accessing the same data, then we 
may obtain performance benefits by confining them all to the same CPU, 
so that they don’t contend for the data and thus cause cache misses.</p></li><li><p class="docList">For
 a time-critical application, it may be desirable to confine most 
processes on the system to other CPUs, while reserving one or more CPUs 
for the time-critical application.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">isolcpus</span>
 kernel boot option can be used to isolate one or more CPUs from the 
normal kernel scheduling algorithms. The only way to move a process on 
or off a CPU that has been isolated is via the CPU affinity system calls
 described in this section. The <span class="docEmphasis">isolcpus</span>
 boot option is the preferred method of implementing the last of the 
scenarios listed above. For details, see the kernel source file <tt>Documentation/kernel-parameters.txt</tt>.</p><p class="docText">Linux also provides a <span class="docEmphasis">cpuset</span>
 kernel option, which can be used on systems containing large numbers of
 CPUs to achieve more sophisticated control over how the CPUs and memory
 are allocated to processes. For details, see the kernel source file <tt>Documentation/cpusets.txt</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Linux 2.6 provides a pair of nonstandard system calls to modify and retrieve the hard CPU affinity of a process: <span class="docEmphasis">sched_setaffinity()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sched_getaffinity()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Many other UNIX implementations provide interfaces for controlling CPU affinity. For example, HP-UX and Solaris provide a <span class="docEmphasis">pset_bind()</span> system call.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sched_setaffinity()</span> system call sets the CPU affinity of the process specified by <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>. If <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> is 0, the CPU affinity of the calling process is changed.</p><pre>#define _GNU_SOURCE
#include &lt;sched.h&gt;

int <b>sched_setaffinity</b>(pid_t <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>, size_t <span class="docEmphasis">len</span>, cpu_set_t *<span class="docEmphasis">set</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The CPU affinity to be assigned to the process is specified in the <span class="docEmphasis">cpu_set_t</span> structure pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">set</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">CPU
 affinity is actually a per-thread attribute that can be adjusted 
independently for each of the threads in a thread group. If we want to 
change the CPU affinity of a specific thread in a multithreaded process,
 we can specify <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> as the value returned by a call to <span class="docEmphasis">gettid()</span> in that thread. Specifying <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> as 0 means the calling thread.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Although the <span class="docEmphasis">cpu_set_t</span>
 data type is implemented as a bit mask, we should treat it as an opaque
 structure. All manipulations of the structure should be done using the 
macros <tt>CPU_ZERO()</tt>, <tt>CPU_SET()</tt>, <tt>CPU_CLR()</tt>, and <tt>CPU_ISSET()</tt>.</p><pre>#define _GNU_SOURCE
#include &lt;sched.h&gt;

void <b>CPU_ZERO</b>(cpu_set_t *<span class="docEmphasis">set</span>);
void <b>CPU_SET</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">cpu</span>, cpu_set_t *<span class="docEmphasis">set</span>);
void <b>CPU_CLR</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">cpu</span>, cpu_set_t *<span class="docEmphasis">set</span>);

int <b>CPU_ISSET</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">cpu</span>, cpu_set_t *<span class="docEmphasis">set</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns true (1) if <span class="docEmphasis">cpu</span> is in <span class="docEmphasis">set</span>, or false (0) otherwise</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">These macros operate on the CPU set pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">set</span> as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><tt>CPU_ZERO()</tt> initializes <span class="docEmphasis">set</span> to be empty.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>CPU_SET()</tt> adds the CPU <span class="docEmphasis">cpu</span> to <span class="docEmphasis">set</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>CPU_CLR()</tt> removes the CPU <span class="docEmphasis">cpu</span> from <span class="docEmphasis">set</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>CPU_ISSET()</tt> returns true if the CPU <span class="docEmphasis">cpu</span> is a member of <span class="docEmphasis">set</span>.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The GNU C library also provides a number of other macros for working with CPU sets. See the <span class="docEmphasis">CPU_SET(3)</span> manual page for details.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The CPUs in a CPU set are numbered starting at 0. The <tt>&lt;sched.h&gt;</tt> header file defines the constant <tt>CPU_SETSIZE</tt> to be one greater than the maximum CPU number that can be represented in a <span class="docEmphasis">cpu_set_t</span> variable. <tt>CPU_SETSIZE</tt> has the value 1024.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">len</span> argument given to <span class="docEmphasis">sched_setaffinity()</span> should specify the number of bytes in the <span class="docEmphasis">set</span> argument (i.e., <span class="docEmphasis">sizeof(cpu_set_t)</span>).</p><p class="docText">The following code confines the process identified by <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> to running on any CPU other than the first CPU of a four-processor system:</p><pre>cpu_set_t set;

CPU_ZERO(&amp;set);
CPU_SET(1, &amp;set);
CPU_SET(2, &amp;set);
CPU_SET(3, &amp;set);

sched_setaffinity(pid, CPU_SETSIZE, &amp;set);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If the CPUs specified in <span class="docEmphasis">set</span> don’t correspond to any CPUs on the system, then <span class="docEmphasis">sched_setaffinity()</span> fails with the error <tt>EINVAL</tt>.</p><p class="docText">If <span class="docEmphasis">set</span> doesn’t include the CPU on which the calling process is currently running, then the process is migrated to one of the CPUs in <span class="docEmphasis">set</span>.</p><p class="docText">An
 unprivileged process may set the CPU affinity of another process only 
if its effective user ID matches the real or effective user ID of the 
target process. A privileged (<tt>CAP_SYS_NICE</tt>) process may set the CPU affinity of any process.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sched_getaffinity()</span> system call retrieves the CPU affinity mask of the process specified by <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>. If <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> is 0, the CPU affinity mask of the calling process is returned.</p><pre>#define _GNU_SOURCE
#include &lt;sched.h&gt;

int <b>sched_getaffinity</b>(pid_t <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>, size_t <span class="docEmphasis">len</span>, cpu_set_t *<span class="docEmphasis">set</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The CPU affinity mask is returned in the <span class="docEmphasis">cpu_set_t</span> structure pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">set</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">len</span> argument should be set to indicate the number of bytes in this structure (i.e., <span class="docEmphasis">sizeof(cpu_set_t)</span>). We can use the <tt>CPU_ISSET()</tt> macro to determine which CPUs are in the returned <span class="docEmphasis">set</span>.</p><p class="docText">If the CPU affinity mask of the target process has not otherwise been modified, <span class="docEmphasis">sched_getaffinity()</span> returns a set containing all of the CPUs on the system.</p><p class="docText">No permission checking is performed by <span class="docEmphasis">sched_getaffinity()</span>; an unprivileged process can retrieve the CPU affinity mask of any process on the system.</p><p class="docText">A child process created by <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> inherits its parent’s CPU affinity mask, and this mask is preserved across an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sched_setaffinity()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sched_getaffinity()</span> system calls are Linux-specific.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <tt>t_sched_setaffinity.c</tt> and <tt>t_sched_getaffinity.c</tt> programs in the <tt>procpri</tt> subdirectory in the source code distribution for this book demonstrate the use of <span class="docEmphasis">sched_setaffinity()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sched_getaffinity()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
