<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>35.5. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">35.5. Summary</h3><p class="docText">The
 default kernel scheduling algorithm employs a round-robin time-sharing 
policy. By default, all processes have equal access to the CPU under 
this policy, but we can set a process’s nice value to a number in the 
range -20 (high priority) to +19 (low priority) to cause the scheduler 
to favor or disfavor that process. However, even if we give a process 
the lowest priority, it is not completely starved of the CPU.</p><p class="docText">Linux
 also implements the POSIX realtime scheduling extensions. These allow 
an application to precisely control the allocation of the CPU to 
processes. Processes operating under the two realtime scheduling 
policies, <tt>SCHED_RR</tt> (round-robin) and <tt>SCHED_FIFO</tt>
 (first-in, first-out), always have priority over processes operating 
under nonrealtime policies. Realtime processes have priorities in the 
range 1 (low) to 99 (high). As long as it is runnable, a higher-priority
 process completely excludes lower-priority processes from the CPU. A 
process operating under the <tt>SCHED_FIFO</tt>
 policy maintains exclusive access to the CPU until either it 
terminates, it voluntarily relinquishes the CPU, or it is preempted 
because a higher-priority process became runnable. Similar rules apply 
to the <tt>SCHED_RR</tt> policy, with the 
addition that if multiple processes are running at the same priority, 
then the CPU is shared among these processes in a round-robin fashion.</p><p class="docText">A
 process’s CPU affinity mask can be used to restrict the process to 
running on a subset of the CPUs available on a multiprocessor system. 
This can improve the performance of certain types of applications.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EU5FK">35.5.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EY5FK">35.5.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">[Love,
 2010] provides background detail on process priorities and scheduling 
on Linux. [Gallmeister, 1995] provides further information about the 
POSIX realtime scheduling API. Although targeted at POSIX threads, much 
of the discussion of the realtime scheduling API in [Butenhof, 1996] is 
useful background to the realtime scheduling discussion in this chapter.</p><p class="docText">For
 further information about CPU affinity and controlling the allocation 
of threads to CPUs and memory nodes on multiprocessor systems, see the 
kernel source file <tt>Documentation/cpusets.txt</tt>, and the <span class="docEmphasis">mbind(2)</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">set_mempolicy(2)</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">cpuset(7)</span> manual pages.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
