<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>35.6. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">35.6. Exercises</h3><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Implement the <span class="docEmphasis">nice(1)</span> command.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write a set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span> program that is the realtime scheduling analog of <span class="docEmphasis">nice(1)</span>. The command-line interface of this program should be as follows:</p><pre># <b>./rtsched</b> <b><tt><i>policy priority command arg...</i></tt></b></pre><br/>
<p class="docList">In the above command, <span class="docEmphasis">policy</span> is <span class="docEmphasis">r</span> for <tt>SCHED_RR</tt> or <span class="docEmphasis">f</span> for <tt>SCHED_FIFO</tt>. This program should drop its privileged ID before execing the command, for the reasons described in Section 9.7.1 and Section 38.3.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write a program that places itself under the <tt>SCHED_FIFO</tt>
 scheduling policy and then creates a child process. Both processes 
should execute a function that causes the process to consume a maximum 
of 3 seconds of CPU time. (This can be done by using a loop in which the
 <span class="docEmphasis">times()</span> 
system call is repeatedly called to determine the amount of CPU time so 
far consumed.) After each quarter of a second of consumed CPU time, the 
function should print a message that displays the process ID and the 
amount of CPU time so far consumed. After each second of consumed CPU 
time, the function should call <span class="docEmphasis">sched_yield()</span> to yield the CPU to the other process. (Alternatively, the processes could raise each other’s scheduling priority using <span class="docEmphasis">sched_setparam()</span>.)
 The program’s output should demonstrate that the two processes 
alternately execute for 1 second of CPU time. (Note carefully the advice
 given in Section 35.3.2 about preventing a runaway realtime process from hogging the CPU.)</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If
 two processes use a pipe to exchange a large amount of data on a 
multiprocessor system, the communication should be faster if the 
processes run on the same CPU than if they run on different CPUs. The 
reason is that when the two processes run on the same CPU, the pipe data
 will be more quickly accessed because it can remain in that CPU’s 
cache. By contrast, when the processes run on separate CPUs, the 
benefits of the CPU cache are lost. If you have access to a 
multiprocessor system, write a program that uses <span class="docEmphasis">sched_setaffinity()</span> to demonstrate this effect, by forcing the processes either onto the same CPUs or onto different CPUs. (Chapter 44 describes the use of pipes.)</p></div></li></ol></div><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The
 advantage in favor of processes running on the same CPU won’t hold true
 on hyperthreaded systems and on some modern multiprocessor 
architectures where the CPUs do share the cache. In these cases, the 
advantage will be in favor of processes running on different CPUs. 
Information about the CPU topology of a multiprocessor system can be 
obtained by inspecting the contents of the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/cpuinfo</tt> file.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
