<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>36.1. Process Resource Usage</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">36.1. Process Resource Usage</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getrusage()</span> system call retrieves statistics about various system resources used by the calling process or by all of its children.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/resource.h&gt;

int <b>getrusage</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">who</span>, struct rusage *<span class="docEmphasis">res_usage</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">who</span> argument specifies the process(es) for which resource usage information is to be retrieved. It has one of the following values:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">RUSAGE_SELF</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Return information about the calling process.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">RUSAGE_CHILDREN</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Return information about all children of the calling process that have terminated and been waited for.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">RUSAGE_THREAD</span></span> (since Linux 2.6.26)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Return information about the calling thread. This value is Linux-specific.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">res_usage</span> argument is a pointer to a structure of type <span class="docEmphasis">rusage</span>, defined as shown in Example 36-1.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EPDGK">Example 36-1. Definition of the <span class="docEmphasis">rusage</span> structure</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight">struct rusage {
    struct timeval ru_utime;      /* User CPU time used */
    struct timeval ru_stime;      /* System CPU time used */
    long           ru_maxrss;     /* Maximum size of resident set (kilobytes)
                                     [used since Linux 2.6.32] */
    long           ru_ixrss;      /* Integral (shared) text memory size
                                     (kilobyte-seconds) [unused] */
    long           ru_idrss;      /* Integral (unshared) data memory used
                                     (kilobyte-seconds) [unused] */
    long           ru_isrss;      /* Integral (unshared) stack memory used
                                     (kilobyte-seconds) [unused] */
    long           ru_minflt;     /* Soft page faults (I/O not required) */
    long           ru_majflt;     /* Hard page faults (I/O required) */
    long           ru_nswap;      /* Swaps out of physical memory [unused] */
    long           ru_inblock;    /* Block input operations via file
                                     system [used since Linux 2.6.22] */
    long           ru_oublock;    /* Block output operations via file
                                     system [used since Linux 2.6.22] */
    long           ru_msgsnd;     /* IPC messages sent [unused] */
    long           ru_msgrcv;     /* IPC messages received [unused] */
    long           ru_nsignals;   /* Signals received [unused] */
    long           ru_nvcsw;      /* Voluntary context switches (process
                                     relinquished CPU before its time slice
                                     expired) [used since Linux 2.6] */
    long          ru_nivcsw;      /* Involuntary context switches (higher
                                     priority process became runnable or time
                                     slice ran out) [used since Linux 2.6] */
};

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">As indicated in the comments in Example 36-1, on Linux, many of the fields in the <span class="docEmphasis">rusage</span> structure are not filled in by <span class="docEmphasis">getrusage()</span> (or <span class="docEmphasis">wait3()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">wait4()</span>),
 or they are filled in only by more recent kernel versions. Some of the 
fields that are unused on Linux are used on other UNIX implementations. 
These fields are provided on Linux so that, if they are implemented at a
 future date, the <span class="docEmphasis">rusage</span> structure does not need to undergo a change that would break existing application binaries.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Although <span class="docEmphasis">getrusage()</span> appears on most UNIX implementations, it is only weakly specified in SUSv3 (which specifies only the fields <span class="docEmphasis">ru_utime</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ru_stime</span>). In part, this is because the meaning of much of the information in the <span class="docEmphasis">rusage</span> structure is implementation-dependent.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">ru_utime</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ru_stime</span> fields are structures of type <span class="docEmphasis">timeval</span> (Section 10.1),
 which return the number of seconds and microseconds of CPU time 
consumed by a process in user mode and kernel mode, respectively. 
(Similar information is retrieved by the <span class="docEmphasis">times()</span> system call described in Section 10.7.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The Linux-specific <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/stat</tt> files expose some resource usage information (CPU time and page faults) about all processes on the system. See the <span class="docEmphasis">proc(5)</span> manual page for further details.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">rusage</span> structure returned by the <span class="docEmphasis">getrusage()</span> <tt>RUSAGE_CHILDREN</tt>
 operation includes the resource usage statistics of all of the 
descendants of the calling process. For example, if we have three 
processes related as parent, child, and grandchild, then, when the child
 does a <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span> on the grandchild, the resource usage values of the grandchild are added to the child’s <tt>RUSAGE_CHILDREN</tt> values; when the parent performs a <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span> for the child, the resource usage values of both the child and the grandchild are added to the parent’s <tt>RUSAGE_CHILDREN</tt> values. Conversely, if the child does not <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span> on the grandchild, then the grandchild’s resource usages are not recorded in the <tt>RUSAGE_CHILDREN</tt> values of the parent.</p><p class="docText">For the <tt>RUSAGE_CHILDREN</tt> operation, the <span class="docEmphasis">ru_maxrss</span>
 field returns the maximum resident set size among all of the 
descendants of the calling process (rather than a sum for all 
descendants).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">SUSv3 specifies that if <tt>SIGCHLD</tt>
 is being ignored (so that children are not turned into zombies that can
 be waited on), then the child statistics should not be added to the 
values returned by <tt>RUSAGE_CHILDREN</tt>. However, as noted in Section 26.3.3, in kernels before 2.6.9, Linux deviates from this requirement—if <tt>SIGCHLD</tt> is ignored, then the resource usage values for dead children <span class="docEmphasis">are</span> included in the values returned for <tt>RUSAGE_CHILDREN</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
