<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>36.2. Process Resource Limits</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">36.2. Process Resource Limits</h3><p class="docText">Each
 process has a set of resource limits that can be used to restrict the 
amounts of various system resources that the process may consume. For 
example, we may want to set resource limits on a process before execing 
an arbitrary program, if we are concerned that it may consume excessive 
resources. We can set the resource limits of the shell using the <span class="docEmphasis">ulimit</span> built-in command (<span class="docEmphasis">limit</span> in the C shell). These limits are inherited by the processes that the shell creates to execute user commands.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Since kernel 2.6.24, the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/limits</tt>
 file can be used to view all of the resource limits of any process. 
This file is owned by the real user ID of the corresponding process and 
its permissions allow reading only by that user ID (or by a privileged 
process).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getrlimit()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">setrlimit()</span> system calls allow a process to fetch and modify its resource limits.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/resource.h&gt;

int <b>getrlimit</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">resource</span>, struct rlimit *<span class="docEmphasis">rlim</span>);
int <b>setrlimit</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">resource</span>, const struct rlimit *<span class="docEmphasis">rlim</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Both return 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">resource</span> argument identifies the resource limit to be retrieved or changed. The <span class="docEmphasis">rlim</span> argument is used to return resource limit values <tt>(getrlimit())</tt> or to specify new resource limit values <tt>(setrlimit())</tt>, and is a pointer to a structure containing two fields:</p><pre>struct rlimit {
    rlim_t rlim_cur;        /* Soft limit (actual process limit) */
    rlim_t rlim_max;        /* Hard limit (ceiling for rlim_cur) */
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">These fields correspond to the two associated limits for a resource: the <span class="docEmphasis">soft</span> (<span class="docEmphasis">rlim_cur</span>) and <span class="docEmphasis">hard</span> (<span class="docEmphasis">rlim_max</span>) limits. (The <span class="docEmphasis">rlim_t</span>
 data type is an integer type.) The soft limit governs the amount of the
 resource that may be consumed by the process. A process can adjust the 
soft limit to any value from 0 up to the hard limit. For most resources,
 the sole purpose of the hard limit is to provide this ceiling for the 
soft limit. A privileged (<tt>CAP_SYS_RESOURCE</tt>)
 process can adjust the hard limit in either direction (as long as its 
value remains greater than the soft limit), but an unprivileged process 
can adjust the hard limit only to a lower value (irreversibly). The 
value <tt>RLIM_INFINITY</tt> in <span class="docEmphasis">rlim_cur</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">rlim_max</span> means infinity (no limit on the resource), both when retrieved via <span class="docEmphasis">getrlimit()</span> and when set via <span class="docEmphasis">setrlimit()</span>.</p><p class="docText">In
 most cases, resource limits are enforced for both privileged and 
unprivileged processes. They are inherited by child processes created 
via <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> and are preserved across an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>.</p><p class="docText">The values that can be specified for the <span class="docEmphasis">resource</span> argument of <span class="docEmphasis">getrlimit()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">setrlimit()</span> are summarized in Table 36-1 and detailed in Section 36.3.</p><p class="docText">Although
 a resource limit is a per-process attribute, in some cases, the limit 
is measured against not just that process’s consumption of the 
corresponding resource, but also against the sum of resources consumed 
by all processes with the same real user ID. The <tt>RLIMIT_NPROC</tt>
 limit, which places a limit on the number of processes that can be 
created, is a good example of the rationale for this approach. Applying 
this limit against only the number of children that the process itself 
created would be ineffective, since each child that the process created 
would also be able to create further children, which could create more 
children, and so on. Instead, the limit is measured against the count of
 all processes that have the same real user ID. Note, however, that the 
resource limit is checked only in the processes where it has been set 
(i.e., the process itself and its descendants, which inherit the limit).
 If another process owned by the same real user ID has not set the limit
 (i.e., the limit is infinite) or has set a different limit, then that 
process’s capacity to create children will be checked according to the 
limit that it has set.</p><p class="docText">As
 we describe each resource limit below, we note those limits that are 
measured against the resources consumed by all processes with the same 
real user ID. If not otherwise specified, then a resource limit is 
measured only against the process’s own consumption of the resource.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Be aware that, in many cases, the shell commands for getting and setting resource limits (<span class="docEmphasis">ulimit</span> in <span class="docEmphasis">bash</span> and the Korn shell, and <span class="docEmphasis">limit</span> in the C shell) use different units from those used in <span class="docEmphasis">getrlimit()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">setrlimit()</span>. For example, the shell commands typically express the limits on the size of various memory segments in kilobytes.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 36-1. Resource values for <span class="docEmphasis">getrlimit()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">setrlimit()</span></h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom"><span class="docEmphasis">resource</span></th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Limit on</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">SUSv3</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>RLIMIT_AS</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Process virtual memory size (bytes)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>RLIMIT_CORE</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Core file size (bytes)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>RLIMIT_CPU</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">CPU time (seconds)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>RLIMIT_DATA</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Process data segment (bytes)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>RLIMIT_FSIZE</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">File size (bytes)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>RLIMIT_MEMLOCK</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Locked memory (bytes)</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>RLIMIT_MSGQUEUE</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Bytes allocated for POSIX message queues for real user ID (since Linux 2.6.8)</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>RLIMIT_NICE</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Nice value (since Linux 2.6.12)</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>RLIMIT_NOFILE</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Maximum file descriptor number plus one</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>RLIMIT_NPROC</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Number of processes for real user ID</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>RLIMIT_RSS</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Resident set size (bytes; not implemented)</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>RLIMIT_RTPRIO</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Realtime scheduling priority (since Linux 2.6.12)</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>RLIMIT_RTTIME</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Realtime CPU time (microseconds; since Linux 2.6.25)</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>RLIMIT_SIGPENDING</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Number of queued signals for real user ID (since Linux 2.6.8)</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>RLIMIT_STACK</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Size of stack segment (bytes)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EUPGK">36.2.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EYPGK">36.2.1.1. Example program</h5><p class="docText">Before going into the specifics of each resource limit, we look at a simple example of the use of resource limits. Example 36-2 defines the function <span class="docEmphasis">printRlimit()</span>, which displays a message, along with the soft and hard limits for a specified resource.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">rlim_t</span> data type is typically represented in the same way as <span class="docEmphasis">off_t</span>, to handle the representation of <tt>RLIMIT_FSIZE</tt>, the file size resource limit. For this reason, when printing <span class="docEmphasis">rlim_t</span> values (as in Example 36-2), we cast them to <span class="docEmphasis">long long</span> and use the <tt>%lld</tt> <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> specifier, as explained in Section 5.10.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The program in Example 36-3 calls <span class="docEmphasis">setrlimit()</span> to set the soft and hard limits on the number of processes that a user may create (<tt>RLIMIT_NPROC</tt>), uses the <span class="docEmphasis">printRlimit()</span> function of Example 36-2
 to display the limits before and after the change, and then creates as 
many processes as possible. When we run this program, setting the soft 
limit to 30 and the hard limit to 100, we see the following:</p><pre>$ <b>./rlimit_nproc 30 100</b>
Initial maximum process limits:  soft=1024; hard=1024
New maximum process limits:      soft=30; hard=100
Child 1 (PID=15674) started
Child 2 (PID=15675) started
Child 3 (PID=15676) started
Child 4 (PID=15677) started
ERROR [EAGAIN Resource temporarily unavailable] fork</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In this example, the program managed to create only 4 new processes, because 26 processes were already running for this user.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EPWGK">Example 36-2. Displaying process resource limits</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>procres/print_rlimit.c</b>
#include &lt;sys/resource.h&gt;
#include "print_rlimit.h"           /* Declares function defined here */
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int                     /* Print 'msg' followed by limits for 'resource' */
printRlimit(const char *msg, int resource)
{
    struct rlimit rlim;

    if (getrlimit(resource, &amp;rlim) == -1)
        return -1;

    printf("%s soft=", msg);
    if (rlim.rlim_cur == RLIM_INFINITY)
        printf("infinite");
#ifdef RLIM_SAVED_CUR               /* Not defined on some implementations */
    else if (rlim.rlim_cur == RLIM_SAVED_CUR)
        printf("unrepresentable");
#endif
    else
        printf("%lld", (long long) rlim.rlim_cur);

    printf("; hard=");
    if (rlim.rlim_max == RLIM_INFINITY)
        printf("infinite\n");
#ifdef RLIM_SAVED_MAX               /* Not defined on some implementations */
    else if (rlim.rlim_max == RLIM_SAVED_MAX)
        printf("unrepresentable");
#endif
    else
        printf("%lld\n", (long long) rlim.rlim_max);

    return 0;
}
     <b>procres/print_rlimit.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E1WGK">Example 36-3. Setting the <tt>RLIMIT_NPROC</tt> resource limit</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>procres/rlimit_nproc.c</b>
#include &lt;sys/resource.h&gt;
#include "print_rlimit.h"               /* Declaration of printRlimit() */
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    struct rlimit rl;
    int j;
    pid_t childPid;

    if (argc &lt; 2 || argc &gt; 3 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s soft-limit [hard-limit]\n", argv[0]);

    printRlimit("Initial maximum process limits: ", RLIMIT_NPROC);

    /* Set new process limits (hard == soft if not specified) */

    rl.rlim_cur = (argv[1][0] == 'i') ? RLIM_INFINITY :
                                getInt(argv[1], 0, "soft-limit");
    rl.rlim_max = (argc == 2) ? rl.rlim_cur :
                (argv[2][0] == 'i') ? RLIM_INFINITY :
                                getInt(argv[2], 0, "hard-limit");
    if (setrlimit(RLIMIT_NPROC, &amp;rl) == -1)
        errExit("setrlimit");

    printRlimit("New maximum process limits:     ", RLIMIT_NPROC);

    /* Create as many children as possible */

    for (j = 1; ; j++) {
        switch (childPid = fork()) {
        case -1: errExit("fork");

        case 0: _exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);            /* Child */

        default:        /* Parent: display message about each new child
                           and let the resulting zombies accumulate */
            printf("Child %d (PID=%ld) started\n", j, (long) childPid);
            break;
        }
    }
}
     <b>procres/rlimit_nproc.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EJXGK">36.2.1.2. Unrepresentable limit values</h5><p class="docText">In some programming environments, the <span class="docEmphasis">rlim_t</span>
 data type may not be able to represent the full range of values that 
could be maintained for a particular resource limit. This may be the 
case on a system that offers multiple programming environments in which 
the size of the <span class="docEmphasis">rlim_t</span> data type differs. Such systems can arise if a large-file compilation environment with a 64-bit <span class="docEmphasis">off_t</span> is added to a system on which <span class="docEmphasis">off_t</span> was traditionally 32 bits. (In each environment, <span class="docEmphasis">rlim_t</span> would be the same size as <span class="docEmphasis">off_t</span>.) This leads to the situation where a program with a small <span class="docEmphasis">rlim_t</span> can, after being execed by a program with a 64-bit <span class="docEmphasis">off_t</span>, inherit a resource limit (e.g., the file size limit) that is greater than the maximum <span class="docEmphasis">rlim_t</span> value.</p><p class="docText">To
 assist portable applications in handling the possibility that a 
resource limit may be unrepresentable, SUSv3 specifies two constants to 
indicate unrepresentable limit values: <tt>RLIM_SAVED_CUR</tt> and <tt>RLIM_SAVED_MAX</tt>. If a soft resource limit can’t be represented in <span class="docEmphasis">rlim_t</span>, then <span class="docEmphasis">getrlimit()</span> will return <tt>RLIM_SAVED_CUR</tt> in the <span class="docEmphasis">rlim_cur</span> field. <tt>RLIM_SAVED_MAX</tt> performs an analogous function for an unrepresentable hard limit returned in the <span class="docEmphasis">rlim_max</span> field.</p><p class="docText">If all possible resource limit values can be represented in <span class="docEmphasis">rlim_t</span>, then SUSv3 permits an implementation to define <tt>RLIM_SAVED_CUR</tt> and <tt>RLIM_SAVED_MAX</tt> to be the same as <tt>RLIM_INFINITY</tt>. This is how these constants are defined on Linux, implying that all possible resource limit values can be represented in <span class="docEmphasis">rlim_t</span>.
 However, this is not the case on 32-bit architectures such as x86-32. 
On those architectures, in a large-file compilation environment (i.e., 
setting the <tt>_FILE_OFFSET_BITS</tt> feature test macro to 64 as described in Section 5.10), the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> definition of <span class="docEmphasis">rlim_t</span> is 64 bits wide, but the kernel data type for representing a resource limit is <span class="docEmphasis">unsigned long</span>, which is only 32 bits wide. Current versions of <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> deal with this situation as follows: if a program compiled with <tt>_FILE_OFFSET_BITS=64</tt> tries to set a resource limit to a value larger than can be represented in a 32-bit <span class="docEmphasis">unsigned long</span>, then the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> wrapper for <span class="docEmphasis">setrlimit()</span> silently converts the value to <tt>RLIM_INFINITY</tt>. In other words, the requested setting of the resource limit is not honored.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Because utilities that handle files are normally compiled with <tt>_FILE_OFFSET_BITS=64</tt>
 in many x86-32 distributions, the failure to honor resource limits 
larger than the value that can be represented in 32 bits is a problem 
that can affect not only application programmers, but also end users.</p><p class="docText">One could argue that it might be better for the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc setrlimit()</span> wrapper to give an error if the requested resource limit exceeds the capacity of a 32-bit <span class="docEmphasis">unsigned long</span>. However, the fundamental problem is a kernel limitation, and the behavior described in the main text is the approach that the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> developers have taken to dealing with it.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
