<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>36.3. Details of Specific Resource Limits</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">36.3. Details of Specific Resource Limits</h3><p class="docText">In this section, we provide details on each of the resource limits available on Linux, noting those that are Linux-specific.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EHGGK">36.3.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ELGGK">36.3.1.1. <tt>RLIMIT_AS</tt></h5><p class="docText">The <tt>RLIMIT_AS</tt> limit specifies the maximum size for the process’s virtual memory (address space), in bytes. Attempts (<span class="docEmphasis">brk()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">sbrk()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">mremap()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">shmat()</span>) to exceed this limit fail with the error <tt>ENOMEM</tt>. In practice, the most common place where a program may hit this limit is in calls to functions in the <span class="docEmphasis">malloc</span> package, which make use of <span class="docEmphasis">sbrk()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span>. Upon encountering this limit, stack growth can also fail with the consequences listed below for <tt>RLIMIT_STACK</tt>.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EMHGK">36.3.1.2. <tt>RLIMIT_CORE</tt></h5><p class="docText">The <tt>RLIMIT_CORE</tt> limit specifies the maximum size, in bytes, for core dump files produced when a process is terminated by certain signals (Section 22.1).
 Production of a core dump file will stop at this limit. Specifying a 
limit of 0 prevents creation of core dump files, which is sometimes 
useful because core dump files can be very large, and end users usually 
don’t know what to do with them. Another reason for disabling core dumps
 is security—to prevent the contents of a program’s memory from being 
dumped to disk. If the <tt>RLIMIT_FSIZE</tt> limit is lower than this limit, core dump files are limited to <tt>RLIMIT_FSIZE</tt> bytes.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ECIGK">36.3.1.3. <tt>RLIMIT_CPU</tt></h5><p class="docText">The <tt>RLIMIT_CPU</tt>
 limit specifies the maximum number of seconds of CPU time (in both 
system and user mode) that can be used by the process. SUSv3 requires 
that the <tt>SIGXCPU</tt> signal be sent to the process when the soft limit is reached, but leaves other details unspecified. (The default action for <tt>SIGXCPU</tt> is to terminate a process with a core dump.) It is possible to establish a handler for <tt>SIGXCPU</tt> that does whatever processing is desired and then returns control to the main program. Thereafter, (on Linux) <tt>SIGXCPU</tt>
 is sent once per second of consumed CPU time. If the process continues 
executing until the hard CPU limit is reached, then the kernel sends it a
 <tt>SIGKILL</tt> signal, which always terminates the process.</p><p class="docText">UNIX implementations vary in the details of how they deal with processes that continue consuming CPU time after handling a <tt>SIGXCPU</tt> signal. Most continue to deliver <tt>SIGXCPU</tt>
 at regular intervals. If aiming for portable use of this signal, we 
should code an application so that, on first receipt of this signal, it 
does whatever cleanup is required and terminates. (Alternatively, the 
program could change the resource limit after receiving the signal.)</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ESJGK">36.3.1.4. <tt>RLIMIT_DATA</tt></h5><p class="docText">The <tt>RLIMIT_DATA</tt>
 limit specifies the maximum size, in bytes, of the process’s data 
segment (the sum of the initialized data, uninitialized data, and heap 
segments described in Section 6.3). Attempts (<span class="docEmphasis">sbrk()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">brk()</span>) to extend the data segment (program break) beyond this limit fail with the error <tt>ENOMEM</tt>. As with <tt>RLIMIT_AS</tt>, the most common place where a program may hit this limit is in calls to functions in the <span class="docEmphasis">malloc</span> package.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ETPGK">36.3.1.5. <tt>RLIMIT_FSIZE</tt></h5><p class="docText">The <tt>RLIMIT_FSIZE</tt>
 limit specifies the maximum size of files that the process may create, 
in bytes. If a process attempts to extend a file beyond the soft limit, 
it is sent a <tt>SIGXFSZ</tt> signal, and the system call (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">truncate()</span>) fails with the error <tt>EFBIG</tt>. The default action for <tt>SIGXFSZ</tt>
 is to terminate a process and produce a core dump. It is possible to 
instead catch this signal and return control to the main program. 
However, any further attempt to extend the file will yield the same 
signal and error.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ESQGK">36.3.1.6. <tt>RLIMIT_MEMLOCK</tt></h5><p class="docText">The <tt>RLIMIT_MEMLOCK</tt>
 limit (BSD-derived; absent from SUSv3 and available only on Linux and 
the BSDs) specifies the maximum number of bytes of virtual memory that a
 process may lock into physical memory, to prevent the memory from being
 swapped out. This limit affects the <span class="docEmphasis">mlock()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">mlockall()</span> system calls, and the locking options for the <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">shmctl()</span> system calls. We describe the details in Section 50.2.</p><p class="docText">If the <tt>MCL_FUTURE</tt> flag is specified when calling <span class="docEmphasis">mlockall()</span>, then the <tt>RLIMIT_MEMLOCK</tt> limit may also cause later calls to <span class="docEmphasis">brk()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">sbrk()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">mremap()</span> to fail.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EGSGK">36.3.1.7. <tt>RLIMIT_MSGQUEUE</tt></h5><p class="docText">The <tt>RLIMIT_MSGQUEUE</tt>
 limit (Linux-specific; since Linux 2.6.8) specifies the maximum number 
of bytes that can be allocated for POSIX message queues for the real 
user ID of the calling process. When a POSIX message queue is created 
using <span class="docEmphasis">mq_open()</span>, bytes are deducted against this limit according to the following formula:</p><pre>bytes = attr.mq_maxmsg * sizeof(struct msg_msg *) +
        attr.mq_maxmsg * attr.mq_msgsize;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In this formula, <span class="docEmphasis">attr</span> is the <span class="docEmphasis">mq_attr</span> structure that is passed as the fourth argument to <span class="docEmphasis">mq_open()</span>. The addend that includes <span class="docEmphasis">sizeof(struct msg_msg *)</span> ensures that the user can’t queue an unlimited number of zero-length messages. (The <span class="docEmphasis">msg_msg</span>
 structure is a data type used internally by the kernel.) This is 
necessary because, although zero-length messages contain no data, they 
do consume some system memory for bookkeeping overhead.</p><p class="docText">The <tt>RLIMIT_MSGQUEUE</tt>
 limit affects only the calling process. Other processes belonging to 
this user are not affected unless they also set this limit or inherit 
it.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EHTGK">36.3.1.8. <tt>RLIMIT_NICE</tt></h5><p class="docText">The <tt>RLIMIT_NICE</tt> limit (Linux-specific; since Linux 2.6.12) specifies a ceiling on the nice value that may be set for this process using <span class="docEmphasis">sched_setscheduler()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">nice()</span>. The ceiling is calculated as <span class="docEmphasis">20 – rlim_cur</span>, where <span class="docEmphasis">rlim_cur</span> is the current <tt>RLIMIT_NICE</tt> soft resource limit. Refer to Section 35.1 for further details.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EPZGK">36.3.1.9. <tt>RLIMIT_NOFILE</tt></h5><p class="docText">The <tt>RLIMIT_NOFILE</tt> limit specifies a number one greater than the maximum file descriptor number that a process may allocate. Attempts (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">pipe()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">socket()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">shm_open()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">dup()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl(F_DUPFD)</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">epoll_create()</span>) to allocate descriptors beyond this limit fail. In most cases, the error is <tt>EMFILE</tt>, but for <span class="docEmphasis">dup2(fd, newfd)</span> it is <tt>EBADF</tt>, and for <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl(fd, F_DUPFD, newfd)</span> with <span class="docEmphasis">newfd</span> is greater than or equal to the limit, it is <tt>EINVAL</tt>.</p><p class="docText">Changes to the <tt>RLIMIT_NOFILE</tt> limit are reflected in the value returned by <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf(_SC_OPEN_MAX)</span>. SUSv3 permits, but doesn’t require, an implementation to return different values for a call to <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf(_SC_OPEN_MAX)</span> before and after changing the <tt>RLIMIT_NOFILE</tt> limit; other implementations may not behave the same as Linux on this point.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">SUSv3 states that if an application sets the soft or hard <tt>RLIMIT_NOFILE</tt>
 limit to a value less than or equal to the number of the highest file 
descriptor that the process currently has open, unexpected behavior may 
occur.</p><p class="docText">On Linux, we can check which file descriptors a process currently has open by using <span class="docEmphasis">readdir()</span> to scan the contents of the <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/fd</tt> directory, which contains symbolic links for each of the file descriptors currently opened by the process.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The kernel imposes a ceiling on the value to which the <tt>RLIMIT_NOFILE</tt> limit may be raised. In kernels before 2.6.25, this ceiling is a hard-coded value defined by the kernel constant <tt>NR_OPEN</tt>,
 whose value is 1,048,576. (A kernel rebuild is required to raise this 
ceiling.) Since kernel 2.6.25, the limit is defined by the value in the 
Linux-specific <tt>/proc/sys/fs/nr_open</tt> file. The default value in this file is 1,048,576; this can be modified by the superuser. Attempts to set the soft or hard <tt>RLIMIT_NOFILE</tt> limit higher than the ceiling value yield the error <tt>EPERM</tt>.</p><p class="docText">There
 is also a system-wide limit on the total number of files that may be 
opened by all processes. This limit can be retrieved and modified via 
the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/sys/fs/file-max</tt> file. (Referring to Section 5.4, we can define <tt>file-max</tt> more precisely as a system-wide limit on the number of open file descriptions.) Only privileged (<tt>CAP_SYS_ADMIN</tt>) processes can exceed the <tt>file-max</tt> limit. In an unprivileged process, a system call that encounters the <tt>file-max</tt> limit fails with the error <tt>ENFILE</tt>.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E24GK">36.3.1.10. <tt>RLIMIT_NPROC</tt></h5><p class="docText">The <tt>RLIMIT_NPROC</tt>
 limit (BSD-derived; absent from SUSv3 and available only on Linux and 
the BSDs) specifies the maximum number of processes that may be created 
for the real user ID of the calling process. Attempts (<span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">vfork()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">clone()</span>) to exceed this limit fail with the error <tt>EAGAIN</tt>.</p><p class="docText">The <tt>RLIMIT_NPROC</tt>
 limit affects only the calling process. Other processes belonging to 
this user are not affected unless they also set or inherit this limit. 
This limit is not enforced for privileged (<tt>CAP_SYS_ADMIN</tt> or <tt>CAP_SYS_RESOURCE</tt>) processes.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Linux
 also imposes a system-wide limit on the number of processes that can be
 created by all users. On Linux 2.4 and later, the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/sys/kernel/threads-max</tt> file can be used to retrieve and modify this limit.</p><p class="docText">To be precise, the <tt>RLIMIT_NPROC</tt> resource limit and the <tt>threads-max</tt> file are actually limits on the numbers of threads that can be created, rather than the number of processes.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The manner in which the default value for the <tt>RLIMIT_NPROC</tt>
 resource limit is set has varied across kernel versions. In Linux 2.2, 
it was calculated according to a fixed formula. In Linux 2.4 and later, 
it is calculated using a formula based on the amount of available 
physical memory.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">SUSv3 doesn’t specify the <tt>RLIMIT_NPROC</tt>
 resource limit. The SUSv3-mandated method for retrieving (but not 
changing) the maximum number of processes permitted to a user ID is via 
the call <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf(_SC_CHILD_MAX)</span>. This <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf()</span>
 call is supported on Linux, but in kernel versions before 2.6.23, the 
call does not return accurate information—it always returns the value 
999. Since Linux 2.6.23 (and with <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> 2.4 and later), this call correctly reports the limit (by checking the value of the <tt>RLIMIT_NPROC</tt> resource limit).</p><p class="docText">There
 is no portable way of discovering how many processes have already been 
created for a specific user ID. On Linux, we can try scanning all of the
 <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/status</tt> files on the system and examining the information under the <tt>Uid</tt>
 entry (which lists the four process user IDs in the order: real, 
effective, saved set, and file system) in order to estimate the number 
of processes currently owned by a user. Be aware, however, that by the 
time we have completed such a scan, this information may already have 
changed.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ESDHK">36.3.1.11. <tt>RLIMIT_RSS</tt></h5><p class="docText">The <tt>RLIMIT_RSS</tt>
 limit (BSD-derived; absent from SUSv3, but widely available) specifies 
the maximum number of pages in the process’s resident set; that is, the 
total number of virtual memory pages currently in physical memory. This 
limit is provided on Linux, but it currently has no effect.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In older Linux 2.4 kernels (up to and including 2.4.29), <tt>RLIMIT_RSS</tt> did have an effect on the behavior of the <span class="docEmphasis">madvise()</span> <tt>MADV_WILLNEED</tt> operation (Section 50.4). If this operation could not be performed as a result of encountering the <tt>RLIMIT_RSS</tt> limit, the error <tt>EIO</tt> was returned in <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EXEHK">36.3.1.12. <tt>RLIMIT_RTPRIO</tt></h5><p class="docText">The <tt>RLIMIT_RTPRIO</tt> limit (Linux-specific; since Linux 2.6.12) specifies a ceiling on the realtime priority that may be set for this process using <span class="docEmphasis">sched_setscheduler()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sched_setparam()</span>. Refer to Section 35.3.2 for further details.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EYIHK">36.3.1.13. <tt>RLIMIT_RTTIME</tt></h5><p class="docText">The <tt>RLIMIT_RTTIME</tt>
 limit (Linux-specific; since Linux 2.6.25) specifies the maximum amount
 of CPU time in microseconds that a process running under a realtime 
scheduling policy may consume without sleeping (i.e., performing a 
blocking system call). The behavior if this limit is reached is the same
 as for <tt>RLIMIT_CPU</tt>: if the process reaches the soft limit, then a <tt>SIGXCPU</tt> signal is sent to the process, and further <tt>SIGXCPU</tt> signals are sent for each additional second of CPU time consumed. On reaching the hard limit, a <tt>SIGKILL</tt> signal is sent. Refer to Section 35.3.2 for further details.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ECKHK">36.3.1.14. <tt>RLIMIT_SIGPENDING</tt></h5><p class="docText">The <tt>RLIMIT_SIGPENDING</tt>
 limit (Linux-specific; since Linux 2.6.8) specifies the maximum number 
of signals that may be queued for the real user ID of the calling 
process. Attempts (<span class="docEmphasis">sigqueue()</span>) to exceed this limit fail with the error <tt>EAGAIN</tt>.</p><p class="docText">The <tt>RLIMIT_SIGPENDING</tt>
 limit affects only the calling process. Other processes belonging to 
this user are not affected unless they also set or inherit this limit.</p><p class="docText">As initially implemented, the default value for the <tt>RLIMIT_SIGPENDING</tt> limit was 1024. Since kernel 2.6.12, the default value has been changed to be the same as the default value for <tt>RLIMIT_NPROC</tt>.</p><p class="docText">For the purposes of checking the <tt>RLIMIT_SIGPENDING</tt>
 limit, the count of queued signals includes both realtime and standard 
signals. (Standard signals can be queued only once to a process.) 
However, this limit is enforced only for <span class="docEmphasis">sigqueue()</span>.
 Even if the number of signals specified by this limit has already been 
queued to processes belonging to this real user ID, it is still possible
 to use <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span> to queue one instance of each of the signals (including realtime signals) that are not already queued to a process.</p><p class="docText">From kernel 2.6.12 onward, the <tt>SigQ</tt> field of the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/status</tt> file displays the current and maximum number of queued signals for the real user ID of the process.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E4LHK">36.3.1.15. <tt>RLIMIT_STACK</tt></h5><p class="docText">The <tt>RLIMIT_STACK</tt>
 limit specifies the maximum size of the process stack, in bytes. 
Attempts to grow the stack beyond this limit result in the generation of
 a <tt>SIGSEGV</tt> signal for the process. Since
 the stack is exhausted, the only way to catch this signal is by 
establishing an alternate signal stack, as described in Section 21.3.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Since Linux 2.6.23, the <tt>RLIMIT_STACK</tt>
 limit also determines the amount of space available for holding the 
process’s command-line arguments and environment variables. See the <span class="docEmphasis">execve(2)</span> manual page for details.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
