<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>37.1. Overview</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">37.1. Overview</h3><p class="docText">A <span class="docEmphasis">daemon</span> is a process with the following characteristics:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">It is long-lived. Often, a daemon is created at system startup and runs until the system is shut down.</p></li><li><p class="docList">It
 runs in the background and has no controlling terminal. The lack of a 
controlling terminal ensures that the kernel never automatically 
generates any job-control or terminal-related signals (such as <tt>SIGINT, SIGTSTP</tt>, and <tt>SIGHUP</tt>) for a daemon.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Daemons are written to carry out specific tasks, as illustrated by the following examples:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">cron</span>: a daemon that executes commands at a scheduled time.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">sshd</span>: the secure shell daemon, which permits logins from remote hosts using a secure communications protocol.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">httpd</span>: the HTTP server daemon (Apache), which serves web pages.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span>: the Internet superserver daemon (described in Section 60.5),
 which listens for incoming network connections on specified TCP/IP 
ports and launches appropriate server programs to handle these 
connections.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Many 
standard daemons run as privileged processes (i.e., effective user ID of
 0), and thus should be coded following the guidelines provided in Chapter 38.</p><p class="docText">It is a convention (not universally observed) that daemons have names ending with the letter <span class="docEmphasis">d</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On Linux, certain daemons are run as <span class="docEmphasis">kernel threads</span>. The code of such daemons is part of the kernel, and they are typically created during system startup. When listed using <span class="docEmphasis">ps(1)</span>, the names of these daemons are surrounded by square brackets (<tt>[]</tt>). One example of a kernel thread is <span class="docEmphasis">pdflush</span>, which periodically flushes dirty pages (e.g., pages from the buffer cache) to disk.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
