<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>37.2. Creating a Daemon</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">37.2. Creating a Daemon</h3><p class="docText">To become a daemon, a program performs the following steps:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Perform a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, after which the parent exits and the child continues. (As a consequence, the daemon becomes a child of the <span class="docEmphasis">init</span> process.) This step is done for two reasons:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Assuming
 the daemon was started from the command line, the parent’s termination 
is noticed by the shell, which then displays another shell prompt and 
leaves the child to continue in the background.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The
 child process is guaranteed not to be a process group leader, since it 
inherited its process group ID from its parent and obtained its own 
unique process ID, which differs from the inherited process group ID. 
This is required in order to be able to successfully perform the next 
step.</p></li></ul></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The child process calls <span class="docEmphasis">setsid()</span> (Section 34.3) to start a new session and free itself of any association with a controlling terminal.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If
 the daemon never opens any terminal devices thereafter, then we don’t 
need to worry about the daemon reacquiring a controlling terminal. If 
the daemon might later open a terminal device, then we must take steps 
to ensure that the device does not become the controlling terminal. We 
can do this in two ways:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Specify the <tt>O_NOCTTY</tt> flag on any <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> that may apply to a terminal device.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Alternatively, and more simply, perform a second <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> after the <span class="docEmphasis">setsid()</span>
 call, and again have the parent exit and the (grand)child continue. 
This ensures that the child is not the session leader, and thus, 
according to the System V conventions for the acquisition of a 
controlling terminal (which Linux follows), the process can never 
reacquire a controlling terminal (Section 34.4).</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On implementations following the BSD conventions, a process can obtain a controlling terminal only through an explicit <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> <tt>TIOCSCTTY</tt> operation, and so this second <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> has no effect with regard to the acquisition of a controlling terminal, but the superfluous <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> does no harm.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Clear the process umask (Section 15.4.6), to ensure that, when the daemon creates files and directories, they have the requested permissions.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Change the process’s current working directory, typically to the root directory (<tt>/</tt>).
 This is necessary because a daemon usually runs until system shutdown; 
if the daemon’s current working directory is on a file system other than
 the one containing <tt>/</tt>, then that file system can’t be unmounted (Section 14.8.2).
 Alternatively, the daemon can change its working directory to a 
location where it does its job or a location defined in its 
configuration file, as long as we know that the file system containing 
this directory never needs to be unmounted. For example, <span class="docEmphasis">cron</span> places itself in <tt>/var/spool/cron</tt>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Close
 all open file descriptors that the daemon has inherited from its 
parent. (A daemon may need to keep certain inherited file descriptors 
open, so this step is optional, or open to variation.) This is done for a
 variety of reasons. Since the daemon has lost its controlling terminal 
and is running in the background, it makes no sense for the daemon to 
keep file descriptors 0, 1, and 2 open if these refer to the terminal. 
Furthermore, we can’t unmount any file systems on which the long-lived 
daemon holds files open. And, as usual, we should close unused open file
 descriptors because file descriptors are a finite resource.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Some UNIX implementations (e.g., Solaris 9 and some of the recent BSD releases) provide a function named <span class="docEmphasis">closefrom(n)</span> (or similar), which closes all file descriptors greater than or equal to <span class="docEmphasis">n</span>. This function isn’t available on Linux.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">After having closed file descriptors 0, 1, and 2, a daemon normally opens <tt>/dev/null</tt> and uses <span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span> (or similar) to make all those descriptors refer to this device. This is done for two reasons:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">It
 ensures that if the daemon calls library functions that perform I/O on 
these descriptors, those functions won’t unexpectedly fail.</p></li><li><p class="docList">It
 prevents the possibility that the daemon later opens a file using 
descriptor 1 or 2, which is then written to—and thus corrupted—by a 
library function that expects to treat these descriptors as standard 
output and standard error.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText"><tt>/dev/null</tt>
 is a virtual device that always discards the data written to it. When 
we want to eliminate the standard output or error of a shell command, we
 can redirect it to this file. Reads from this device always return 
end-of-file.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></div></li></ol></div><p class="docText">We now show the implementation of a function, <span class="docEmphasis">becomeDaemon()</span>, that performs the steps described above in order to turn the caller into a daemon.</p><pre>#include &lt;syslog.h&gt;

int <b>becomeDaemon</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">becomeDaemon()</span> function takes a bit-mask argument, <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>, that allows the caller to selectively inhibit some of the steps, as described in the comments in the header file in Example 37-1.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EWPGK">Example 37-1. Header file for <tt>become_daemon.c</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedWidth"><b>daemons/become_daemon.h</b>
#ifndef BECOME_DAEMON_H             /* Prevent double inclusion */
#define BECOME_DAEMON_H

/* Bit-mask values for 'flags' argument of becomeDaemon() */

#define BD_NO_CHDIR           01    /* Don't chdir("/") */
#define BD_NO_CLOSE_FILES     02    /* Don't close all open files */
#define BD_NO_REOPEN_STD_FDS  04    /* Don't reopen stdin, stdout, and
                                      stderr to /dev/null */
#define BD_NO_UMASK0         010    /* Don't do a umask(0) */

#define BD_MAX_CLOSE  8192          /* Maximum file descriptors to close if
                                       sysconf(_SC_OPEN_MAX) is indeterminate */

int becomeDaemon(int flags);

#endif
      <b>daemons/become_daemon.h</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">The implementation of the <span class="docEmphasis">becomeDaemon()</span> function is shown in Example 37-2.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The GNU C library provides a nonstandard function, <span class="docEmphasis">daemon()</span>, that turns the caller into a daemon. The <span class="docEmphasis">glibc daemon()</span> function doesn’t have an equivalent of the <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> argument of our <span class="docEmphasis">becomeDaemon()</span> function.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EERGK">Example 37-2. Creating a daemon process</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>daemons/become_daemon.c</b>
#include &lt;sys/stat.h&gt;
#include &lt;fcntl.h&gt;
#include "become_daemon.h"
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int                             /* Returns 0 on success, -1 on error */
becomeDaemon(int flags)
{
    int maxfd, fd;

    switch (fork()) {                   /* Become background process */
    case -1: return -1;
    case 0:  break;                     /* Child falls through... */
    default: _exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);       /* while parent terminates */
    }

    if (setsid() == -1)                 /* Become leader of new session */
        return -1;

    switch (fork()) {                   /* Ensure we are not session leader */
    case -1: return -1;
    case 0:  break;
    default: _exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
    }

    if (!(flags &amp; BD_NO_UMASK0))
        umask(0);                       /* Clear file mode creation mask */

    if (!(flags &amp; BD_NO_CHDIR))
        chdir("/");                     /* Change to root directory */

    if (!(flags &amp; BD_NO_CLOSE_FILES)) { /* Close all open files */
        maxfd = sysconf(_SC_OPEN_MAX);
        if (maxfd == -1)                /* Limit is indeterminate... */
            maxfd = BD_MAX_CLOSE;       /* so take a guess */

        for (fd = 0; fd &lt; maxfd; fd++)
            close(fd);
    }

    if (!(flags &amp; BD_NO_REOPEN_STD_FDS)) {
        close(STDIN_FILENO);            /* Reopen standard fd's to /dev/null */

        fd = open("/dev/null", O_RDWR);

        if (fd != STDIN_FILENO)         /* 'fd' should be 0 */
            return -1;
        if (dup2(STDIN_FILENO, STDOUT_FILENO) != STDOUT_FILENO)
            return -1;
        if (dup2(STDIN_FILENO, STDERR_FILENO) != STDERR_FILENO)
            return -1;
    }

    return 0;
}
      <b>daemons/become_daemon.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">If we write a program that makes the call <span class="docEmphasis">becomeDaemon(0)</span> and then sleeps for a while, we can use <span class="docEmphasis">ps(1)</span> to look at some of the attributes of the resulting process:</p><pre>$ <b>./test_become_daemon</b>
$ <b>ps -C test_become_daemon -o "pid ppid pgid sid tty command"</b>
  PID  PPID  PGID   SID TT       COMMAND
24731     1 24730 24730 ?        ./test_become_daemon</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">We don’t show the source code for <tt>daemons/test_become_daemon.c</tt>, since it is trivial, but the program is provided in the source code distribution for this book.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">In the output of <span class="docEmphasis">ps</span>, the <tt>?</tt> under the <span class="docEmphasis">TT</span>
 heading indicates that the process has no controlling terminal. From 
the fact that the process ID is not the same as the session ID (SID), we
 can also see that the process is not the leader of its session, and so 
won’t reacquire a controlling terminal if it opens a terminal device. 
This is as things should be for a daemon.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
