<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>37.3. Guidelines for Writing Daemons</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">37.3. Guidelines for Writing Daemons</h3><p class="docText">As
 previously noted, a daemon typically terminates only when the system 
shuts down. Many standard daemons are stopped by application-specific 
scripts executed during system shutdown. Those daemons that are not 
terminated in this fashion will receive a <tt>SIGTERM</tt> signal, which the <span class="docEmphasis">init</span> process sends to all of its children during system shutdown. By default, <tt>SIGTERM</tt>
 terminates a process. If the daemon needs to perform any cleanup before
 terminating, it should do so by establishing a handler for this signal.
 This handler must be designed to perform such cleanup quickly, since <span class="docEmphasis">init</span> follows up the <tt>SIGTERM</tt> signal with a <tt>SIGKILL</tt> signal after 5 seconds. (This doesn’t mean that the daemon can perform 5 seconds’ worth of CPU work; <span class="docEmphasis">init</span> signals all of the processes on the system at the same time, and they may all be attempting to clean up within that 5 seconds.)</p><p class="docText">Since daemons are long-lived, we must be particularly wary of possible memory leaks (Section 7.1.3)
 and file descriptor leaks (where an application fails to close all of 
the file descriptors it opens). If such bugs affect a daemon, the only 
remedy is to kill it and restart it after (fixing the bug).</p><p class="docText">Many
 daemons need to ensure that just one instance of the daemon is active 
at one time. For example, it makes no sense to have two copies of the <span class="docEmphasis">cron</span> daemon both trying to execute scheduled jobs. In Section 55.6, we look at a technique for achieving this.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
