<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>37.6. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">37.6. Summary</h3><p class="docText">A
 daemon is a long-lived process that has no controlling terminal (i.e., 
it runs in the background). Daemons perform specific tasks, such as 
providing a network login facility or serving web pages. To become a 
daemon, a program performs a standard sequence of steps, including calls
 to <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">setsid()</span>.</p><p class="docText">Where appropriate, daemons should correctly handle the arrival of the <tt>SIGTERM</tt> and <tt>SIGHUP</tt> signals. The <tt>SIGTERM</tt> signal should result in an orderly shutdown of the daemon, while the <tt>SIGHUP</tt>
 signal provides a way to trigger the daemon to reinitialize itself by 
rereading its configuration file and reopening any log files it may be 
using.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">syslog</span>
 facility provides a convenient way for daemons (and other applications)
 to log error and other messages to a central location. These messages 
are processed by the <span class="docEmphasis">syslogd</span> daemon, which redistributes the messages according to the dictates of the <tt>syslogd.conf</tt>
 configuration file. Messages may be redistributed to a number of 
targets, including terminals, disk files, logged-in users, and, via a 
TCP/IP network, to other processes on remote hosts (typically other <span class="docEmphasis">syslogd</span> daemons).</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EEQGK">37.6.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EIQGK">37.6.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">Perhaps the best source of further information about writing daemons is the source code of various existing daemons.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
