<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 38. Writing Secure Privileged Programs</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0E6PGK">Chapter 38. Writing Secure Privileged Programs</h2><p class="docText">Privileged
 programs have access to features and resources (files, devices, and so 
on) that are not available to ordinary users. A program can run with 
privileges by two general means:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The program was started under a privileged user ID. Many daemons and network servers, which are typically run as <span class="docEmphasis">root</span>, fall into this category.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The
 program has its set-user-ID or set-group-ID permission bit set. When a 
set-user-ID (set-group-ID) program is execed, it changes the effective 
user (group) ID of the process to be the same as the owner (group) of 
the program file. (We first described set-user-ID and set-group-ID 
programs in Section 9.3.) In this chapter, we’ll sometimes use the term 
set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span> to 
distinguish a set-user-ID program that gives superuser privileges to a 
process from one that gives a process another effective identity.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">If
 a privileged program contains bugs, or can be subverted by a malicious 
user, then the security of the system or an application can be 
compromised. From a security viewpoint, we should write programs so as 
to minimize both the chance of a compromise and the damage that can be 
done if a compromise does occur. These topics form the subject of this 
chapter, which provides a set of recommended practices for secure 
programming, and describes various pitfalls that should be avoided when 
writing privileged programs.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
