<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>38.1. Is a Set-User-ID or Set-Group-ID Program Required?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">38.1. Is a Set-User-ID or Set-Group-ID Program Required?</h3><p class="docText">One
 of the best pieces of advice concerning set-user-ID and set-group-ID 
programs is to avoid writing them whenever possible. If there is an 
alternative way of performing a task that doesn’t involve giving a 
program privilege, we should generally employ that alternative, since it
 eliminates the possibility of a security compromise.</p><p class="docText">Sometimes,
 we can isolate the functionality that needs privilege into a separate 
program that performs a single task, and exec that program in a child 
process as required. This technique can be especially useful for 
libraries. One example of such a use is provided by the <span class="docEmphasis">pt_chown</span> program described in Section 64.2.2.</p><p class="docText">Even
 in cases where a set-user-ID or set-group-ID is needed, it isn’t always
 necessary for a set-user-ID program to give a process <span class="docEmphasis">root</span> credentials. If giving a process some other credentials suffices, then this option should be preferred, since running with <span class="docEmphasis">root</span> privileges opens the gates to possible security compromises.</p><p class="docText">Consider
 a set-user-ID program that needs to allow users to update a file on 
which they do not have write permission. A safer way to do this is to 
create a dedicated group account (group ID) for this program, change the
 group ownership of the file to that group (and make the file writable 
by that group), and write a set-group-ID program that sets the process’s
 effective group ID to the dedicated group ID. Since the dedicated group
 ID is not otherwise privileged, this greatly limits the damage that can
 be done if the program contains bugs or can otherwise be subverted.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
