<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>38.2. Operate with Least Privilege</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">38.2. Operate with Least Privilege</h3><p class="docText">A
 set-user-ID (or set-group-ID) program typically requires privileges 
only to perform certain operations. While the program (especially one 
assuming superuser privileges) is performing other work, it should 
disable these privileges. When privileges will never again be required, 
they should be dropped permanently. In other words, the program should 
always operate with the <span class="docEmphasis">least privilege</span>
 required to accomplish the tasks that it is currently performing. The 
saved set-user-ID facility was designed for this purpose (Section 9.4).</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4RGK">38.2.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EBSGK">38.2.1.1. Hold privileges only while they are required</h5><p class="docText">In a set-user-ID program, we can use the following sequence of <span class="docEmphasis">seteuid()</span> calls to temporarily drop and then reacquire privileges:</p><pre>uid_t orig_euid;

orig_euid = geteuid();
if (seteuid(getuid()) == -1)            /* Drop privileges */
    errExit("seteuid");

/* Do unprivileged work */

if (seteuid(orig_euid) == -1)           /* Reacquire privileges */
    errExit("seteuid");

/* Do privileged work */</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The first call makes the 
effective user ID of the calling process the same as its real ID. The 
second call restores the effective user ID to the value held in the 
saved set-user-ID.</p><p class="docText">For set-group-ID programs, the saved set-group-ID saves the program’s initial effective group ID, and <span class="docEmphasis">setegid()</span> is used to drop and reacquire privilege. We describe <span class="docEmphasis">seteuid()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">setegid()</span>, and other similar system calls mentioned in the following recommendations in Chapter 9 and summarize them in Table 9-1 (in Section 9.7.5).</p><p class="docText">The
 safest practice is to drop privileges immediately on program startup, 
and then temporarily reacquire them as needed at later points in the 
program. If, at a certain point, privileges will never be required 
again, then the program should drop them irreversibly, by ensuring that 
the saved set-user-ID is also changed. This eliminates the possibility 
of the program being tricked into reacquiring privilege, perhaps via the
 stack-crashing technique described in Section 38.9.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EPTGK">38.2.1.2. Drop privileges permanently when they will never again be required</h5><p class="docText">If
 a set-user-ID or set-group-ID program finishes all tasks that require 
privileges, then it should drop its privileges permanently in order to 
eliminate any security risk that could occur because the program is 
compromised by a bug or other unexpected behavior. Dropping privileges 
permanently is accomplished by resetting all process user (group) IDs to
 the same value as the real (group) ID.</p><p class="docText">From a set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span> program whose effective user ID is currently 0, we can reset all user IDs using the following code:</p><pre>if (setuid(getuid()) == -1)
    errExit("setuid");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">However, the above code does <span class="docEmphasis">not</span>
 reset the saved set-user-ID if the effective user ID of the calling 
process is currently nonzero: when called from a program whose effective
 user ID is nonzero, <span class="docEmphasis">setuid()</span> changes only the effective user ID (Section 9.7.1). In other words, in a set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span> program, the following sequence doesn’t permanently drop the user ID 0:</p><pre>/* Initial UIDs:    real=1000 effective=0 saved=0 */

/* 1. Usual call to temporarily drop privilege */

orig_euid = geteuid();
if (seteuid(getuid() == -1)
    errExit("seteuid");

/* UIDs changed to: real=1000 effective=1000 saved=0 */

/* 2. Looks like the right way to permanently drop privilege (WRONG!) */

if (setuid(getuid() == -1)
    errExit("setuid");

/* UIDs unchanged:  real=1000 effective=1000 saved=0 */</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Instead, we must regain privilege prior to dropping it permanently, by inserting the following call between steps 1 and 2 above:</p><pre>if (seteuid(orig_euid) == -1)
    errExit("seteuid");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">On the other hand, if we have a set-user-ID program owned by a user other than <span class="docEmphasis">root</span>, then, because <span class="docEmphasis">setuid()</span> is insufficient to change the saved set-user-ID, we must use either <span class="docEmphasis">setreuid()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">setresuid()</span> to permanently drop the privileged identifier. For example, we could achieve the desired result using <span class="docEmphasis">setreuid()</span>, as follows:</p><pre>if (setreuid(getuid(), getuid()) == -1)
    errExit("setreuid");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This code relies on a feature of the Linux implementation of <span class="docEmphasis">setreuid()</span>: if the first (<span class="docEmphasis">ruid</span>)
 argument is not -1, then the saved set-user-ID is also set to the same 
value as the (new) effective user ID. SUSv3 doesn’t specify this 
feature, but many other implementations behave the same way as Linux. 
SUSv4 does specify this feature.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">setregid()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">setresgid()</span>
 system call must likewise be used to permanently drop a privileged 
group ID in a set-group-ID program, since, when the effective user ID of
 a program is nonzero, <span class="docEmphasis">setgid()</span> changes only the effective group ID of the calling process.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EBWGK">38.2.1.3. General points on changing process credentials</h5><p class="docText">In
 the preceding pages, we described techniques for temporarily and 
permanently dropping privileges. We now add a few general points 
regarding the use of these techniques:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The
 semantics of some of the system calls that change process credentials 
vary across systems. Furthermore, the semantics of some of these system 
calls vary depending on whether or not the caller is privileged 
(effective user ID of 0). For details, see Chapter 9, and especially Section 9.7.4. Because of these variations, [Tsafrir et al., 2008] recommends that applications should use system-specific <span class="docEmphasis">nonstandard</span>
 system calls for changing process credentials, since, in many cases, 
these nonstandard system calls provide simpler and more consistent 
semantics than their standard counterparts. On Linux, this would 
translate to using <span class="docEmphasis">setresuid()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">setresgid()</span>
 to change user and group credentials. Although these system calls are 
not present on all systems, their use is likely to be less prone to 
error. ([Tsafrir et al., 2008] proposes a library of functions that make
 credential changes using what they consider to be the best interfaces 
available on each platform.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">On
 Linux, even if the caller has an effective user ID of 0, system calls 
for changing credentials may not behave as expected if the program has 
explicitly manipulated its capabilities. For example, if the <tt>CAP_SETUID</tt>
 capability has been disabled, then attempts to change process user IDs 
will fail or, even worse, silently change only some of the requested 
user IDs.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Because
 of the possibilities listed in the two preceding points, it is highly 
recommended practice (see, for example, [Tsafrir et al., 2008]) to not 
only check that a credential-changing system call has succeeded, but 
also to verify that the change occurred as expected. For example, if we 
are temporarily dropping or reacquiring a privileged user ID using <span class="docEmphasis">seteuid()</span>, then we should follow that call with a <span class="docEmphasis">geteuid()</span>
 call that verifies that the effective user ID is what we expect. 
Similarly, if we are dropping a privileged user ID permanently, then we 
should verify that the real user ID, effective user ID, and saved 
set-user-ID have all been successfully changed to the unprivileged user 
ID. Unfortunately, while there are standard system calls for retrieving 
the real and effective IDs, there are no standard system calls for 
retrieving the saved set IDs. Linux and a few other systems provide <span class="docEmphasis">getresuid()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getresgid()</span> for this purpose; on some other systems, we may need to employ techniques such as parsing information in <tt>/proc</tt> files.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Some
 credential changes can be made only by processes with an effective user
 ID of 0. Therefore, when changing multiple IDs—supplementary group IDs,
 group IDs, and user IDs—we should drop the privileged effective user ID
 last when dropping privileged IDs. Conversely, we should raise the 
privileged effective user ID first when raising privileged IDs.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
