<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>38.3. Be Careful When Executing a Program</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">38.3. Be Careful When Executing a Program</h3><p class="docText">Caution is required when a privileged program executes another program, either directly, via an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, or indirectly, via <span class="docEmphasis">system()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">popen()</span>, or a similar library function.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECTGK">38.3.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EGTGK">38.3.1.1. Drop privileges permanently before execing another program</h5><p class="docText">If
 a set-user-ID (or set-group-ID) program executes another program, then 
it should ensure that all process user (group) IDs are reset to the same
 value as the real user (group) ID, so that the new program doesn’t 
start with privileges and also can’t reacquire them. One way to do this 
is to reset all of the IDs before performing the <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, using the techniques described in Section 38.2.</p><p class="docText">The same result can be achieved by preceding the <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> with the call <span class="docEmphasis">setuid(getuid())</span>. Even though this <span class="docEmphasis">setuid()</span>
 call changes only the effective user ID in a process whose effective 
user ID is nonzero, privileges are nevertheless dropped because (as 
described in Section 9.4) a successful <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> goes on to copy the effective user ID to the saved set-user-ID. (If the <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>
 fails, then the saved set-user-ID is left unchanged. This may be useful
 if the program then needs to perform other privileged work because the <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> failed.)</p><p class="docText">A similar approach (i.e., <span class="docEmphasis">setgid(getgid())</span>) can be used with set-group-ID programs, since a successful <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> also copies the effective group ID to the saved set-group-ID.</p><p class="docText">As
 an example, suppose that we have a set-user-ID program owned by user ID
 200. When this program is executed by a user whose ID is 1000, the user
 IDs of the resulting process will be as follows:</p><pre>real=1000 effective=200 saved=200</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If this program subsequently executes the call <span class="docEmphasis">setuid(getuid())</span>, then the process user IDs are changed to the following:</p><pre>real=1000 effective=1000 saved=200</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">When the process 
executes an unprivileged program, the effective user ID of the process 
is copied to the saved set-user-ID, resulting in the following set of 
process user IDs:</p><pre>real=1000 effective=1000 saved=1000</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EWUGK">38.3.1.2. Avoid executing a shell (or other interpreter) with privileges</h5><p class="docText">Privileged programs running under user control should never exec a shell, either directly or indirectly (via <span class="docEmphasis">system()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">popen()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">execlp()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">execvp()</span>, or other similar library functions). The complexity and power of shells (and other unconstrained interpreters such as <span class="docEmphasis">awk</span>)
 mean that it is virtually impossible to eliminate all security 
loopholes, even if the execed shell doesn’t allow interactive access. 
The consequent risk is that the user may be able to execute arbitrary 
shell commands under the effective user ID of the process. If a shell 
must be execed, ensure that privileges are permanently dropped 
beforehand.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">An example of the kind of security loophole that can occur when execing a shell is noted in the discussion of <span class="docEmphasis">system()</span> in Section 27.6.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">A few UNIX implementations honor the set-user-ID and set-group-ID permission bits when they are applied to interpreter scripts (Section 27.3),
 so that, when the script is run, the process executing the script 
assumes the identity of some other (privileged) user. Because of the 
security risks just described, Linux, like some other UNIX 
implementations, silently ignores the set-user-ID and set-group-ID 
permission bits when execing a script. Even on implementations where 
set-user-ID and set-group-ID scripts are permitted, their use should be 
avoided.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EUWGK">38.3.1.3. Close all unnecessary file descriptors before an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span></h5><p class="docText">In Section 27.4, we noted that, by default, file descriptors remain open across an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>.
 A privileged program may open a file that normal processes can’t 
access. The resulting open file descriptor represents a privileged 
resource. The file descriptor should be closed before an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>,
 so that the execed program can’t access the associated file. We can do 
this either by explicitly closing the file descriptor or by setting its 
close-on-exec flag (Section 27.4).</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
