<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>38.5. Confine the Process</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">38.5. Confine the Process</h3><p class="docText">In
 this section, we consider ways in which we can confine a program to 
limit the damage that is done if the program is compromised.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERUGK">38.5.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EVUGK">38.5.1.1. Consider using capabilities</h5><p class="docText">The Linux capabilities scheme divides the traditional all-or-nothing UNIX privilege scheme into distinct units called <span class="docEmphasis">capabilities</span>.
 A process can independently enable or disable individual capabilities. 
By enabling just those capabilities that it requires, a program operates
 with less privilege than it would have if run with full <span class="docEmphasis">root</span> privileges. This reduces the potential for damage if the program is compromised.</p><p class="docText">Furthermore, using capabilities and the <span class="docEmphasis">securebits</span> flags, we can create a process that has a limited set of capabilities but is not owned by <span class="docEmphasis">root</span> (i.e., all of its user IDs are nonzero). Such a process can no longer use <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> to regain a full set of capabilities. We describe capabilities and the <span class="docEmphasis">securebits</span> flags in Chapter 39.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EOVGK">38.5.1.2. Consider using a <span class="docEmphasis">chroot</span> jail</h5><p class="docText">A useful security technique in certain cases is to establish a <span class="docEmphasis">chroot</span> jail to limit the set of directories and files that a program may access. (Make sure to also call <span class="docEmphasis">chdir()</span> to change the process’s current working directory to a location within the jail.) Note, however, that a <span class="docEmphasis">chroot</span> jail is insufficient to confine a set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span> program (see Section 18.12).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">An alternative to using a <span class="docEmphasis">chroot</span> jail is a <span class="docEmphasis">virtual server</span>,
 which is a server implemented on top of a virtual kernel. Because each 
virtual kernel is isolated from other virtual kernels that may be 
running on the same hardware, a virtual server is more secure and 
flexible than a <span class="docEmphasis">chroot</span>
 jail. (Several other modern operating systems also provide their own 
implementations of virtual servers.) The oldest virtualization 
implementation on Linux is User-Mode Linux (UML), which is a standard 
part of the Linux 2.6 kernel. Further information about UML can be found
 at http://user-mode-linux.sourceforge.net/. More recent virtual kernel projects include Xen (http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/Research/SRG/netos/xen/) and KVM (http://kvm.qumranet.com/).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
