<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>38.6. Beware of Signals and Race Conditions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">38.6. Beware of Signals and Race Conditions</h3><p class="docText">A
 user may send arbitrary signals to a set-user-ID program that they have
 started. Such signals may arrive at any time and with any frequency. We
 need to consider the race conditions that can occur if a signal is 
delivered at <span class="docEmphasis">any</span>
 point in the execution of the program. Where appropriate, signals 
should be caught, blocked, or ignored to prevent possible security 
problems. Furthermore, the design of signal handlers should be as simple
 as possible, in order to reduce the risk of inadvertently creating a 
race condition.</p><p class="docText">This issue is particularly relevant with the signals that stop a process (e.g., <tt>SIGTSTP</tt> and <tt>SIGSTOP</tt>). The problematic scenario is the following:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A set-user-ID program determines some information about its run-time environment.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The
 user manages to stop the process running the program and change details
 of the run-time environment. Such changes may include modifying the 
permissions on a file, changing the target of a symbolic link, or 
removing a file that the program depends on.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The user resumes the process with a <tt>SIGCONT</tt>
 signal. At this point, the program will continue execution based on now
 false assumptions about its run-time environment, and these assumptions
 may lead to a security breach.</p></div></li></ol></div><p class="docText">The situation described here is really just a special case of a <span class="docEmphasis">time-of-check</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">time-of-use</span>
 race condition. A privileged process should avoid performing operations
 based on previous verifications that may no longer hold (refer to the 
discussion of the <span class="docEmphasis">access()</span> system call in Section 15.4.4
 for a specific example). This guideline applies even when the user 
can’t send signals to the process. The ability to stop a process simply 
allows a user to widen the interval between the time of the check and 
the time of use.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Although
 it may be difficult on a single attempt to stop a process between the 
time of check and time of use, a malicious user could execute a 
set-user-ID program repeatedly, and use another program or a shell 
script to repeatedly send stop signals to the set-user-ID program and 
change the run-time environment. This greatly improves the chances of 
subverting the set-user-ID program.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
