<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>38.8. Don't Trust Inputs or the Environment</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">38.8. Don't Trust Inputs or the Environment</h3><p class="docText">Privileged
 programs should avoid making assumptions about the input they are 
given, or the environment in which they are running.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6WGK">38.8.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EDXGK">38.8.1.1. Don't trust the environment list</h5><p class="docText">Set-user-ID
 and set-group-ID programs should not assume that the values of 
environment variables are reliable. Two variables that are particularly 
relevant are <tt>PATH</tt> and <tt>IFS</tt>.</p><p class="docText"><tt>PATH</tt> determines where the shell (and thus <span class="docEmphasis">system()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">popen()</span>), as well as <span class="docEmphasis">execlp()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">execvp()</span>, search for programs. A malicious user can set <tt>PATH</tt>
 to a value that may trick a set-user-ID program employing one of these 
functions into executing an arbitrary program with privilege. If these 
functions are to be used, PATH should be set to a trustworthy list of 
directories (but better still, absolute pathnames should be specified 
when execing programs). However, as already noted, it is best to drop 
privileges before execing a shell or employing one of the aforementioned
 functions.</p><p class="docText"><tt>IFS</tt>
 specifies the delimiting characters that the shell interprets as 
separating the words of a command line. This variable should be set to 
an empty string, which means that only white-space characters are 
interpreted by the shell as word separators. Some shells always set <tt>IFS</tt> in this way on startup. (Section 27.6 describes one vulnerability relating to <tt>IFS</tt> that appeared in older Bourne shells.)</p><p class="docText">In some cases, it may be safest to erase the entire environment list (Section 6.7),
 and then restore selected environment variables with known-safe values,
 especially when executing other programs or calling libraries that may 
be affected by environment variable settings.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EYYGK">38.8.1.2. Handle untrusted user inputs defensively</h5><p class="docText">A
 privileged program should carefully validate all inputs from untrusted 
sources before taking action based on those inputs. Such validation may 
include verifying that numbers fall within acceptable limits, and that 
strings are of an acceptable length and consist of acceptable 
characters. Among inputs that may need to be validated in this way are 
those coming from user-created files, command-line arguments, 
interactive inputs, CGI inputs, email messages, environment variables, 
interprocess communication channels (FIFOs, shared memory, and so on) 
accessible by untrusted users, and network packets.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EGZGK">38.8.1.3. Avoid unreliable assumptions about the process's run-time environment</h5><p class="docText">A
 set-user-ID program should avoid making unreliable assumptions about 
its initial run-time environment. For example, standard input, output, 
or error may have been closed. (These descriptors might have been closed
 in the program that execs the set-user-ID program.) In this case, 
opening a file could inadvertently reuse descriptor 1 (for example), so 
that, while the program thinks it is writing to standard output, it is 
actually writing to the file it opened.</p><p class="docText">There
 are many other possibilities to consider. For example, a process may 
exhaust various resource limits, such as the limit on the number of 
processes that may be created, the CPU time resource limit, or the file 
size resource limit, with the result that various system calls may fail 
or various signals may be generated. Malicious users may attempt to 
deliberately engineer resource exhaustion in an attempt to subvert a 
program.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
