<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>38.9. Beware of Buffer Overruns</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">38.9. Beware of Buffer Overruns</h3><p class="docText">Beware of buffer overruns (overflows), where an input value or copied string exceeds the allocated buffer space. Never use <span class="docEmphasis">gets()</span>, and employ functions such as <span class="docEmphasis">scanf()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">sprintf()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">strcpy()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">strcat()</span> with caution (e.g., guarding their use with <tt>if</tt> statements that prevent buffer overruns).</p><p class="docText">Buffer overruns allow techniques such as <span class="docEmphasis">stack crashing</span> (also known as <span class="docEmphasis">stack smashing</span>),
 whereby a malicious user employs a buffer overrun to place carefully 
coded bytes into a stack frame in order to force the privileged program 
to execute arbitrary code. (Several online sources explain the details 
of stack crashing; see also [Erickson, 2008] and [Anley, 2007].) Buffer 
overruns are probably the single most common source of security breaches
 on computer systems, as evidenced by the frequency of advisories posted
 by CERT (http://www.cert.org/) and to Bugtraq (http://www.securityfocus.com/).
 Buffer overruns are particularly dangerous in network servers, since 
they leave a system open to remote attack from anywhere on a network.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In
 order to make stack crashing more difficult—in particular, to make such
 attacks much more time-consuming when conducted remotely against 
network servers—from kernel 2.6.12 onward, Linux implements <span class="docEmphasis">address-space randomization</span>.
 This technique randomly varies the location of the stack over an 8 MB 
range at the top of virtual memory. In addition, the locations of memory
 mappings may also be randomized, if the soft <tt>RLIMIT_STACK</tt> limit is not infinite and the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/sys/vm/legacy_va_layout</tt> file contains the value 0.</p><p class="docText">More recent x86-32 architectures provide hardware support for marking page tables as <span class="docEmphasis">NX</span>
 (“no execute”). This feature is used to prevent execution of program 
code on the stack, thus making stack crashing more difficult.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">There are safe alternatives to many of the functions mentioned above—for example, <span class="docEmphasis">snprintf()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">strncpy()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">strncat()</span>—that
 allow the caller to specify the maximum number of characters that 
should be copied. These functions take the specified maximum into 
account in order to avoid overrunning the target buffer. In general, 
these alternatives are preferable, but must still be handled with care. 
In particular, note the following points:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">With
 most of these functions, if the specified maximum is reached, then a 
truncated version of the source string is placed in the target buffer. 
Since such a truncated string may be meaningless in terms of the 
semantics of the program, the caller must check if truncation occurred 
(e.g., using the return value from <span class="docEmphasis">snprintf()</span>), and take appropriate action if it has.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Using <span class="docEmphasis">strncpy()</span> can carry a performance impact. If, in the call <span class="docEmphasis">strncpy(s1</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">s2</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">n</span>), the string pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">s2</span> is less than <span class="docEmphasis">n</span> bytes in length, then padding null bytes are written to <span class="docEmphasis">s1</span> to ensure that <span class="docEmphasis">n</span> bytes in total are written.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If the maximum size value given to <span class="docEmphasis">strncpy()</span> is not long enough to permit the inclusion of the terminating null character, then the target string is <span class="docEmphasis">not</span> null-terminated.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Some UNIX implementations provide the <span class="docEmphasis">strlcpy()</span> function, which, given a length argument <span class="docEmphasis">n</span>, copies at most <span class="docEmphasis">n - 1</span>
 bytes to the destination buffer and always appends a null character at 
the end of the buffer. However, this function is not specified in SUSv3 
and is not implemented in <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>.
 Furthermore, in cases where the caller is not carefully checking string
 lengths, this function only substitutes one problem (buffer overflows) 
for another (silently discarding data).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
