<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>38.10. Beware of Denial-of-Service Attacks</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">38.10. Beware of Denial-of-Service Attacks</h3><p class="docText">With
 the increase in Internet-based services has come a corresponding 
increase in the opportunities for remote denial-of-service attacks. 
These attacks attempt to make a service unavailable to legitimate 
clients, either by sending the server malformed data that causes it to 
crash or by overloading it with bogus requests.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Local
 denial-of-service attacks are also possible. The most well-known 
example is when a user runs a simple fork bomb (a program that 
repeatedly forks, thus consuming all of the process slots on the 
system). However, the origin of local denial-of-service attacks is much 
easier to determine, and they can generally be prevented by suitable 
physical and password security measures.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Dealing
 with malformed requests is straightforward—a server should be 
programmed to rigorously check its inputs and avoid buffer overruns, as 
described above.</p><p class="docText">Overload 
attacks are more difficult to deal with. Since the server can’t control 
the behavior of remote clients or the rate at which they submit 
requests, such attacks are impossible to prevent. (The server may not 
even be able to determine the true origin of the attack, since the 
source IP address of a network packet can be spoofed. Alternatively, 
distributed attacks may enlist unwitting intermediary hosts to direct an
 attack at a target system.) Nevertheless, various measures can be taken
 to minimize the risk and consequences of an overload attack:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The
 server should perform load throttling, dropping requests when the load 
exceeds some predetermined limit. This will have the consequence of 
dropping legitimate requests, but prevents the server and host machine 
from becoming overloaded. The use of resource limits and disk quotas may
 also be helpful in limiting excessive loads. (Refer to http://sourceforge.net/projects/linuxquota/ for more information on disk quotas.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">A
 server should employ timeouts for communication with a client, so that 
if the client (perhaps deliberately) doesn’t respond, the server is not 
tied up indefinitely waiting on the client.</p></li><li><p class="docList">In
 the event of an overload, the server should log suitable messages so 
that the system administrator is notified of the problem. (However, 
logging should be throttled, so that logging itself does not overload 
the system.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">The 
server should be programmed so that it doesn’t crash in the face of an 
unexpected load. For example, bounds checking should be rigorously 
performed to ensure that excessive requests don’t overflow a data 
structure.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Data structures should be designed to avoid <span class="docEmphasis">algorithmic-complexity attacks</span>.
 For example, a binary tree may be balanced and deliver acceptable 
performance under typical loads. However, an attacker could construct a 
sequence of inputs that result in an unbalanced tree (the equivalent of a
 linked list in the worst case), which could cripple performance. 
[Crosby &amp; Wallach, 2003] details the nature of such attacks and 
discusses data-structuring techniques that can be used to avoid them.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
