<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>38.11. Check Return Statuses and Fail Safely</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">38.11. Check Return Statuses and Fail Safely</h3><p class="docText">A
 privileged program should always check to see whether system calls and 
library functions succeed, and whether they return expected values. 
(This is true for all programs, of course, but is especially important 
for privileged programs.) Various system calls can fail, even for a 
program running as <span class="docEmphasis">root</span>. For example, <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> may fail if the system-wide limit on the number of processes is encountered, an <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> for writing may fail on a read-only file system, or <span class="docEmphasis">chdir()</span> may fail if the target directory doesn’t exist.</p><p class="docText">Even
 where a system call succeeds, it may be necessary to check its result. 
For example, where it matters, a privileged program should check that a 
successful <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> has not returned one of the three standard file descriptors: 0, 1, or 2.</p><p class="docText">Finally,
 if a privileged program encounters an unexpected situation, then the 
appropriate behavior is usually either to terminate or, in the case of a
 server, to drop the client request. Attempting to fix unexpected 
problems typically requires making assumptions that may not be justified
 in all circumstances and may lead to the creation of security 
loopholes. In such situations, it is safer to have the program 
terminate, or to have the server log a message and discard the client’s 
request.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
