<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>38.12. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">38.12. Summary</h3><p class="docText">Privileged
 programs have access to system resources that are not available to 
ordinary users. If such programs can be subverted, then the security of 
the system can be compromised. In this chapter, we presented a set of 
guidelines for writing privileged programs. The aim of these guidelines 
is twofold: to minimize the chances of a privileged program being 
subverted, and to minimize the damage that can be done in the event that
 a privileged program is subverted.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ET1GK">38.12.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EX1GK">38.12.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">[Viega
 &amp; McGraw, 2002] covers a broad range of topics relating to the 
design and implementation of secure software. General information about 
security on UNIX systems, as well as a chapter on secure-programming 
techniques can be found in [Garfinkel et al., 2003]. Computer security 
is covered at some length in [Bishop, 2005], and at even greater length 
by the same author in [Bishop, 2003]. [Peikari &amp; Chuvakin, 2004] 
describes computer security with a focus on the various means by which 
system may be attacked. [Erickson, 2008] and [Anley, 2007] both provide a
 thorough discussion of various security exploits, providing enough 
detail for wise programmers to avoid these exploits. [Chen et al., 2002]
 is a paper describing and analyzing the UNIX set-user-ID model. 
[Tsafrir et al., 2008] revises and enhances the discussion of various 
points in [Chen et al., 2002]. [Drepper, 2009] provides a wealth of tips
 on secure and defensive programming on Linux.</p><p class="docText">Several sources of information about writing secure programs are available online, including the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Matt Bishop has written a range of security-related papers, which are available online at http://nob.cs.ucdavis.edu/~bishop/secprog. The most interesting of these is “How to Write a Setuid Program,” (originally published in <span class="docEmphasis">;login: 12(1) Jan/Feb 1986</span>). Although somewhat dated, this paper contains a wealth of useful tips.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">Secure Programming for Linux and Unix HOWTO</span>, written by David Wheeler, is available at http://www.dwheeler.com/secure-programs/.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A useful checklist for writing set-user-ID programs is available online at http://www.homeport.org/~adam/setuid.7.html.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
