<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>39.1. Rationale for Capabilities</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">39.1. Rationale for Capabilities</h3><p class="docText">The
 traditional UNIX privilege scheme divides processes into two 
categories: those whose effective user ID is 0 (superuser), which bypass
 all privilege checks, and all other processes, which are subject to 
privilege checking according to their user and group IDs.</p><p class="docText">The
 coarse granularity of this scheme is a problem. If we want to allow a 
process to perform some operation that is permitted only to the 
superuser—for example, changing the system time—then we must run that 
process with an effective user ID of 0. (If an unprivileged user needs 
to perform such operations, this is typically implemented using a 
set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span>
 program.) However, this grants the process privileges to perform a host
 of other actions as well—for example, bypassing all permission checks 
when accessing files—thus opening the door for a range of security 
breaches if the program behaves in unexpected ways (which may be the 
consequence of unforeseen circumstances, or because of deliberate 
manipulation by a malicious user). The traditional way of dealing with 
this problem was outlined in Chapter 38:
 we drop effective privileges (i.e., change from an effective user ID of
 0, while maintaining 0 in the saved set-user-ID) and temporarily 
reacquire them only when needed.</p><p class="docText">The
 Linux capability scheme refines the handling of this problem. Rather 
than using a single privilege (i.e., effective user ID of 0) when 
performing security checks in the kernel, the superuser privilege is 
divided into distinct units, called <span class="docEmphasis">capabilities</span>.
 Each privileged operation is associated with a particular capability, 
and a process can perform that operation only if it has the 
corresponding capability (regardless of its effective user ID). Put 
another way, everywhere in this book that we talk about a privileged 
process on Linux, what we really mean is a process that has the relevant
 capability for performing a particular operation.</p><p class="docText">Most
 of the time, the Linux capability scheme is invisible to us. The reason
 for this is that when an application that is unaware of capabilities 
assumes an effective user ID of 0, the kernel grants that process the 
complete range of capabilities.</p><p class="docText">The Linux capabilities implementation is based on the POSIX 1003.1e draft standard (http://wt.tuxomania.net/publications/posix.1e/).
 This standardization effort foundered in the late 1990s before it was 
completed, but various capabilities implementations are nevertheless 
based on the draft standard. (Some of the capabilities listed in Table 39-1 are defined in the POSIX.1e draft, but many are Linux extensions.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Capability
 schemes are provided in a few other UNIX implementations, such as in 
Sun’s Solaris 10 and earlier Trusted Solaris releases, SGI’s Trusted 
Irix, and as part of the TrustedBSD project for FreeBSD ([Watson, 
2000]). Similar schemes exist in some other operating systems; for 
example, the privilege mechanism in Digital’s VMS system.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
