<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>39.4. The Modern Capabilities Implementation</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">39.4. The Modern Capabilities Implementation</h3><p class="docText">A complete implementation of capabilities requires the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">For
 each privileged operation, the kernel should check whether the process 
has the relevant capability, rather than checking for an effective (or 
file system) user ID of 0.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The kernel must provide system calls allowing a process’s capabilities to be retrieved and modified.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The
 kernel must support the notion of attaching capabilities to an 
executable file, so that the process gains the associated capabilities 
when that file is execed. This is analogous to the set-user-ID bit, but 
allows the independent specification of all capabilities on the 
executable file. In addition, the system must provide a set of 
programming interfaces and commands for setting and viewing the 
capabilities attached to an executable file.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Up
 to and including kernel 2.6.23, Linux met only the first two of these 
requirements. Since kernel 2.6.24, it is possible to attach capabilities
 to a file. Various other features were added in kernels 2.6.25 and 
2.6.26 in order to complete the capabilities implementation.</p><p class="docText">For most of our discussion of capabilities, we’ll focus on the modern implementation. In Section 39.10,
 we consider how the implementation differed before file capabilities 
were introduced. Furthermore, file capabilities are an optional kernel 
component in modern kernels, but for the main part of our discussion, 
we’ll assume that this component is enabled. Later, we’ll describe the 
differences that occur if file capabilities are not enabled. (In several
 respects, the behavior is similar to that of Linux in kernels before 
2.6.24, where file capabilities were not implemented.)</p><p class="docText">In the following sections, we go into more detail on the Linux capabilities implementation.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
