<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>39.5. Transformation of Process Capabilities During exec()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">39.5. Transformation of Process Capabilities During <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span></h3><p class="docText">During an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>,
 the kernel sets new capabilities for the process based on the process’s
 current capabilities and the capability sets of the file being 
executed. The kernel calculates the new capabilities of the process 
using the following rules:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">P'(permitted) = (P(inheritable) &amp; F(inheritable)) | (F(permitted) &amp; cap_bset)

P'(effective) = F(effective) ? P'(permitted) : 0

P'(inheritable) = P(inheritable)

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In the above rules, <span class="docEmphasis">P</span> denotes the value of a capability set prior to the <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">P’</span> denotes the value of a capability set after the <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">F</span> denotes a file capability set. The identifier <span class="docEmphasis">cap_bset</span> denotes the value of the capability bounding set. Note that <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> leaves the process inheritable capability set unchanged.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E3AHK">39.5.1. Capability Bounding Set</h4><p class="docText">The capability bounding set is a security mechanism that is used to limit the capabilities that a process can gain during an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>. This set is used as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">During an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>,
 the capability bounding set is ANDed with the file permitted 
capabilities to determine the permitted capabilities that are to be 
granted to the new program. In other words, an executable file’s 
permitted capability set can’t grant a permitted capability to a process
 if the capability is not in the bounding set.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The
 capability bounding set is a limiting superset for the capabilities 
that can be added to the process’s inheritable set. This means that, 
unless the capability is in the bounding set, a process can’t add one of
 its permitted capabilities to its inheritable set and then—via the 
first of the capability transformation rules described above—have that 
capability preserved in its permitted set when it execs a file that has 
the capability in its inheritable set.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The capability bounding set is a per-process attribute that is inherited by a child created via <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, and preserved across an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>. On a kernel that supports file capabilities, <span class="docEmphasis">init</span> (the ancestor of all processes) starts with a capability bounding set that contains all capabilities.</p><p class="docText">If a process has the <tt>CAP_SETPCAP</tt> capability, then it can (irreversibly) remove capabilities from its bounding set using the <span class="docEmphasis">prctl()</span> <tt>PR_CAPBSET_DROP</tt>
 operation. (Dropping a capability from the bounding set doesn’t affect 
the process permitted, effective, and inheritable capability sets.) A 
process can determine if a capability is in its bounding set using the <span class="docEmphasis">prctl()</span> <tt>PR_CAPBSET_READ</tt> operation.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">More
 precisely, the capability bounding set is a per-thread attribute. 
Starting with Linux 2.6.26, this attribute is displayed as the <tt>CapBnd</tt> field in the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/task/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">TID</span><tt>/status</tt> file. The <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/status</tt> file shows the bounding set of a process’s main thread.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4DHK">39.5.2. Preserving <span class="docEmphasis">root</span> Semantics</h4><p class="docText">In order to preserve the traditional semantics for the <span class="docEmphasis">root</span> user (i.e., <span class="docEmphasis">root</span>
 has all privileges) when executing a file, any capability sets 
associated with the file are ignored. Instead, for the purposes of the 
algorithm shown in Section 39.5, the file capability sets are notionally defined as follows during an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">If a set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span> program is being execed, or the real or effective user ID of the process calling <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> is 0, then the file inheritable and permitted sets are defined to be all ones.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If a set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span> program is being execed, or the effective user ID of the process calling <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> is 0, then the file effective bit is defined to be set.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Assuming that we are execing a set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span>
 program, these notional definitions of the file capability sets mean 
that the calculation of the process’s new permitted and effective 
capability sets in Section 39.5 simplifies to the following:</p><pre>P'(permitted) = P(inheritable) | cap_bset
P'(effective) = P'(permitted)</pre><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
