<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>39.7. Changing Process Capabilities Programmatically</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">39.7. Changing Process Capabilities Programmatically</h3><p class="docText">A process can raise or drop capabilities from its capability sets using either the <span class="docEmphasis">capset()</span> system call or, preferably, the <span class="docEmphasis">libcap</span> API, which we describe below. Changes to process capabilities are subject to the following rules:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If the process doesn’t have the <tt>CAP_SETPCAP</tt> capability in its effective set, then the new <span class="docEmphasis">inheritable</span> set must be a subset of the combination of the existing inheritable and permitted sets.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The new <span class="docEmphasis">inheritable</span> set must be a subset of the combination of the existing inheritable set and the capability bounding set.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The new <span class="docEmphasis">permitted</span>
 set must be a subset of the existing permitted set. In other words, a 
process can’t grant itself permitted capabilities that it doesn’t have. 
Put another way, a capability dropped from the permitted set can’t be 
reacquired.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The new <span class="docEmphasis">effective</span> set is allowed to contain only capabilities that are also in the new permitted set.</p></div></li></ol></div><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4EHK">39.7.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EBFHK">39.7.1.1. The <span class="docEmphasis">libcap</span> API</h5><p class="docText">Up to this point, we have deliberately not shown the prototype of the <span class="docEmphasis">capset()</span> system call, or its counterpart <span class="docEmphasis">capget()</span>,
 which retrieves a process’s capabilities. This is because the use of 
these system calls should be avoided. Instead, the functions in the <span class="docEmphasis">libcap</span>
 library should be employed. These functions provide an interface that 
conforms with the withdrawn draft POSIX 1003.1e standard, along with 
some Linux extensions.</p><p class="docText">For reasons of space, we don’t describe the <span class="docEmphasis">libcap</span> API in detail. As an overview, we note that programs employing these functions typically carry out the following steps:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Use the <span class="docEmphasis">cap_get_proc()</span>
 function to retrieve a copy of the process’s current capability sets 
from the kernel and place it in a structure that the function allocates 
in user space. (Alternatively, we may use the <span class="docEmphasis">cap_init()</span> function to create a new, empty capability set structure.) In the <span class="docEmphasis">libcap</span> API, the <span class="docEmphasis">cap_t</span> data type is a pointer used to refer to such structures.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Use the <span class="docEmphasis">cap_set_flag()</span> function to update the user-space structure to raise (<tt>CAP_SET</tt>) and drop (<tt>CAP_CLEAR</tt>)
 capabilities from the permitted, effective, and inheritable sets stored
 in the user-space structure retrieved in the previous step.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Use the <span class="docEmphasis">cap_set_proc()</span> function to pass the user-space structure back to the kernel in order to change the process’s capabilities.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Use the <span class="docEmphasis">cap_free()</span> function to free the structure that was allocated by the <span class="docEmphasis">libcap</span> API in the first step.</p></div></li></ol></div><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">At the time of writing, work is in progress on <span class="docEmphasis">libcap-ng</span>, a new, improved capabilities library API. Details can be found at http://freshmeat.net/projects/libcap-ng.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EDIHK">39.7.1.2. Example program</h5><p class="docText">In Example 8-2, in Section 8.6,
 we presented a program that authenticates a username plus password 
against the standard password database. We noted that the program 
requires privilege in order to read the shadow password file, which is 
protected to prevent reading by users other than <span class="docEmphasis">root</span> or members of the <span class="docEmphasis">shadow</span> group. The traditional way of providing this program with the privileges that it requires would be to run it under a <span class="docEmphasis">root</span> login or to make it a set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span> program. We now present a modified version of this program that employs capabilities and the <span class="docEmphasis">libcap</span> API.</p><p class="docText">In
 order to read the shadow password file as a normal user, we need to 
bypass the standard file permission checks. Scanning the capabilities 
listed in Table 39-1, we see that the appropriate capability is <tt>CAP_DAC_READ_SEARCH</tt>. Our modified version of the password authentication program is shown in Example 39-1. This program uses the <span class="docEmphasis">libcap</span> API to raise <tt>CAP_DAC_READ_SEARCH</tt>
 in its effective capability set just before accessing the shadow 
password file, and then drops the capability again immediately after 
this access. In order for an unprivileged user to employ the program, we
 must set this capability in the file permitted capability set, as shown
 in the following shell session:</p><pre>$ <b>sudo setcap "cap_dac_read_search=p" check_password_caps</b>
root's password:
$ <b>getcap check_password_caps</b>
check_password_caps = cap_dac_read_search+p
$ <b>./check_password_caps</b>
Username: <b>mtk</b>
Password:
Successfully authenticated: UID=1000</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EYLHK">Example 39-1. A capability-aware program that authenticates a user</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>cap/check_password_caps.c</b>
#define _BSD_SOURCE         /* Get getpass() declaration from &lt;unistd.h&gt; */
#define _XOPEN_SOURCE       /* Get crypt() declaration from &lt;unistd.h&gt; */
#include &lt;sys/capability.h&gt;
#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;
#include &lt;limits.h&gt;
#include &lt;pwd.h&gt;
#include &lt;shadow.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

/* Change setting of capability in caller's effective capabilities */

static int
modifyCap(int capability, int setting)
{
    cap_t caps;
    cap_value_t capList[1];

    /* Retrieve caller's current capabilities */

    caps = cap_get_proc();
    if (caps == NULL)
        return -1;

    /* Change setting of 'capability' in the effective set of 'caps'. The
       third argument, 1, is the number of items in the array 'capList'. */

    capList[0] = capability;
    if (cap_set_flag(caps, CAP_EFFECTIVE, 1, capList, setting) == -1) {
        cap_free(caps);
        return -1;
    }

    /* Push modified capability sets back to kernel, to change
       caller's capabilities */

    if (cap_set_proc(caps) == -1) {
        cap_free(caps);
        return -1;
    }

    /* Free the structure that was allocated by libcap */

    if (cap_free(caps) == -1)
        return -1;

    return 0;
}

static int              /* Raise capability in caller's effective set */
raiseCap(int capability)
{
    return modifyCap(capability, CAP_SET);
}

/* An analogous dropCap() (unneeded in this program), could be
   defined as: modifyCap(capability, CAP_CLEAR); */

static int              /* Drop all capabilities from all sets */
dropAllCaps(void)
{
    cap_t empty;
    int s;

    empty = cap_init();
    if (empty == NULL)
        return -1;

    s = cap_set_proc(empty);
    if (cap_free(empty) == -1)
        return -1;

    return s;
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    char *username, *password, *encrypted, *p;
    struct passwd *pwd;
    struct spwd *spwd;
    Boolean authOk;
    size_t len;
    long lnmax;

    lnmax = sysconf(_SC_LOGIN_NAME_MAX);
    if (lnmax == -1)                        /* If limit is indeterminate */
        lnmax = 256;                        /* make a guess */

    username = malloc(lnmax);
    if (username == NULL)
        errExit("malloc");

    printf("Username: ");
    fflush(stdout);
    if (fgets(username, lnmax, stdin) == NULL)
        exit(EXIT_FAILURE);                 /* Exit on EOF */

    len = strlen(username);
    if (username[len - 1] == '\n')
        username[len - 1] = '\0';           /* Remove trailing '\n' */

    pwd = getpwnam(username);
    if (pwd == NULL)
        fatal("couldn't get password record");

    /* Only raise CAP_DAC_READ_SEARCH for as long as we need it */

    if (raiseCap(CAP_DAC_READ_SEARCH) == -1)
        fatal("raiseCap() failed");

    spwd = getspnam(username);
    if (spwd == NULL &amp;&amp; errno == EACCES)
        fatal("no permission to read shadow password file");

    /* At this point, we won't need any more capabilities,
       so drop all capabilities from all sets */

    if (dropAllCaps() == -1)
        fatal("dropAllCaps() failed");

    if (spwd != NULL)               /* If there is a shadow password record */
        pwd-&gt;pw_passwd = spwd-&gt;sp_pwdp;     /* Use the shadow password */

    password = getpass("Password: ");

    /* Encrypt password and erase cleartext version immediately */

    encrypted = crypt(password, pwd-&gt;pw_passwd);
    for (p = password; *p != '\0'; )
        *p++ = '\0';

    if (encrypted == NULL)
        errExit("crypt");

    authOk = strcmp(encrypted, pwd-&gt;pw_passwd) == 0;
    if (!authOk) {
        printf("Incorrect password\n");
        exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
    }

    printf("Successfully authenticated: UID=%ld\n", (long) pwd-&gt;pw_uid);

    /* Now do authenticated work... */

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>cap/check_password_caps.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
