<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>39.8. Creating Capabilities-Only Environments</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">39.8. Creating Capabilities-Only Environments</h3><p class="docText">In the preceding pages, we have described various ways in which a process with the user ID 0 (<span class="docEmphasis">root</span>) is treated specially with respect to capabilities:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">When
 a process with one or more user IDs that equal 0 sets all of its user 
IDs to nonzero values, its permitted and effective capability sets are 
cleared. (See Section 39.6.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">When
 a process with an effective user ID of 0 changes that user ID to a 
nonzero value, it loses its effective capabilities. When the reverse 
change is made, the permitted capability set is copied to the effective 
set. A similar procedure is followed for a subset of capabilities when 
the process’s file-system user ID is switched between 0 and nonzero 
values. (See Section 39.6.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">If a process with real or effective user ID of <span class="docEmphasis">root</span> execs a program, or any process execs a set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span>
 program, then the file inheritable and permitted sets are notionally 
defined to be all ones. If the process’s effective user ID is 0, or it 
is execing a set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span> program, then the file effective bit is notionally defined to be 1. (See Section 39.5.2.) In the usual cases (i.e., both the real and effective user ID are <span class="docEmphasis">root</span>, or a set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span> program is being execed), this means the process gets all capabilities in its permitted and effective sets.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">In a fully capability-based system, the kernel would not need to perform any of these special treatments of <span class="docEmphasis">root</span>. There would be no set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span> programs, and file capabilities would be used to grant just the minimum capabilities that a program requires.</p><p class="docText">Since
 existing applications aren’t engineered to make use of the 
file-capabilities infrastructure, the kernel must maintain the 
traditional handling of processes with the user ID 0. Nevertheless, we 
may want an application to run in a purely capability-based environment 
in which <span class="docEmphasis">root</span> gets
 none of the special treatments described above. Starting with kernel 
2.6.26, and if file capabilities are enabled in the kernel, Linux 
provides the <span class="docEmphasis">securebits</span> mechanism, which controls a set of per-process flags that enable or disable each of the three special treatments for <span class="docEmphasis">root</span>. (To be precise, the <span class="docEmphasis">securebits</span> flags are actually a per-thread attribute.)</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">securebits</span> mechanism controls the flags shown in Table 39-2. The flags exist as related pairs of a <span class="docEmphasis">base</span> flag and a corresponding <span class="docEmphasis">locked</span> flag. Each of the base flags controls one of the special treatments of <span class="docEmphasis">root</span>
 described above. Setting the corresponding locked flag is a one-time 
operation that prevents further changes to the associated base flag—once
 set, the locked flag can’t be unset.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 39-2. The <span class="docEmphasis">securebits</span> flags</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Flag</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Meaning if set</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SECBIT_KEEP_CAPS</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Don’t
 drop permitted capabilities when a process with one or more 0 user IDs 
sets all of its user IDs to nonzero values. This flag has an effect only
 if <tt>SECBIT_NO_SETUID_FIXUP</tt> is not also set. This flag is cleared on an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SECBIT_NO_SETUID_FIXUP</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Don’t change capabilities when effective or file-system user IDs are switched between 0 and nonzero values.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SECBIT_NOROOT</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">If a process with a real or effective user ID of 0 does an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, or it execs a set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span> program, don’t grant it capabilities (unless the executable has file capabilities).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SECBIT_KEEP_CAPS_LOCKED</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Lock <tt>SECBIT_KEEP_CAPS</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SECBIT_NO_SETUID_FIXUP_LOCKED</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Lock <tt>SECBIT_NO_SETUID_FIXUP</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SECBIT_NOROOT_LOCKED</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Lock <tt>SECBIT_NOROOT</tt>.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">securebits</span> flag settings are inherited in a child created by <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>. All of the flag settings are preserved during <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, except <tt>SECBIT_KEEP_CAPS</tt>, which is cleared for historical compatibility with the <tt>PR_SET_KEEPCAPS</tt> setting, described below.</p><p class="docText">A process can retrieve the <span class="docEmphasis">securebits</span> flags using the <span class="docEmphasis">prctl()</span> <tt>PR_GET_SECUREBITS</tt> operation. If a process has the <tt>CAP_SETPCAP</tt> capability, it can modify the <span class="docEmphasis">securebits</span> flags using the <span class="docEmphasis">prctl()</span> <tt>PR_SET_SECUREBITS</tt> operations. A purely capability-based application can irreversibly disable special treatment of <span class="docEmphasis">root</span> for the calling process and all of its descendants using the following call:</p><pre>if (prctl(PR_SET_SECUREBITS,
          /* SECBIT_KEEP_CAPS off */
          SECBIT_NO_SETUID_FIXUP | SECBIT_NO_SETUID_FIXUP_LOCKED |
          SECBIT_NOROOT | SECBIT_NOROOT_LOCKED)
        == -1)
    errExit("prctl");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">After this call, the only 
way in which this process and its descendants can obtain capabilities is
 by executing programs that have file capabilities.</p><a name="secbit_underscore_keep_underscore"></a><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESJHK">39.8.1. </h4><a name="secbit_underscore_keep_underscore-id1"></a><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EWJHK">39.8.1.1. <tt>SECBIT_KEEP_CAPS</tt> and the <span class="docEmphasis">prctl()</span> <tt>PR_SET_KEEPCAPS</tt> operation</h5><p class="docText">The <tt>SECBIT_KEEP_CAPS</tt>
 flag prevents capabilities from being dropped when a process with one 
or more user IDs with the value 0 sets all of its user IDs to nonzero 
values. Roughly speaking, <tt>SECBIT_KEEP_CAPS</tt> provides half of the functionality provided by <tt>SECBIT_NO_SETUID_FIXUP</tt>. (As noted in Table 39-2, <tt>SECBIT_KEEP_CAPS</tt> has an effect only if <tt>SECBIT_NO_SETUID_FIXUP</tt> is not set.) This flag exists to provide a <span class="docEmphasis">securebits</span> flag that mirrors the older <span class="docEmphasis">prctl()</span> <tt>PR_SET_KEEPCAPS</tt>
 operation, which controls the same attribute. (The one difference 
between the two mechanisms is that a process doesn’t need the <tt>CAP_SETPCAP</tt> capability to employ the <span class="docEmphasis">prctl()</span> <tt>PR_SET_KEEPCAPS</tt> operation.)</p><a name="secbit_underscore_keep_underscore-id1d8384e107831"></a><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Earlier, we noted that all of the <span class="docEmphasis">securebits</span> flags are preserved during an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, except <tt>SECBIT_KEEP_CAPS</tt>. The setting of the <tt>SECBIT_KEEP_CAPS</tt> bit was made the converse of the other <span class="docEmphasis">securebits</span> settings in order to maintain consistency with the treatment of the attribute set by the <span class="docEmphasis">prctl()</span> <tt>PR_SET_KEEPCAPS</tt> operation.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">prctl()</span> <tt>PR_SET_KEEPCAPS</tt> operation is designed for use by set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span>
 programs running on older kernels that don’t support file capabilities.
 Such programs can still improve their security by programmatically 
dropping and raising capabilities as required (refer to Section 39.10).</p><p class="docText">However, even if such a set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span>
 program drops all capabilities except those that it requires, it still 
maintains two important privileges: the ability to access files owned by
 <span class="docEmphasis">root</span> and the ability to regain capabilities by execing a program (Section 39.5.2).
 The only way of permanently dropping these privileges is to set all of 
the process’s user IDs to nonzero values. But doing that normally 
results in the clearing of the permitted and effective capability sets 
(see the four points in Section 39.6
 concerning the effect of user ID changes on capabilities). This defeats
 the purpose, which is to permanently drop user ID 0, while maintaining 
some capabilities. To allow this possibility, the <span class="docEmphasis">prctl()</span> <tt>PR_SET_KEEPCAPS</tt>
 operation can be used to set the process attribute that prevents the 
permitted capability set from being cleared when all user IDs are 
changed to a nonzero value. (The process’s effective capability set is 
always cleared in this case, regardless of the setting of the “keep 
capabilities” attribute.)</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
