<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>39.9. Discovering the Capabilities Required by a Program</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">39.9. Discovering the Capabilities Required by a Program</h3><p class="docText">Suppose
 we have a program that is unaware of capabilities and that is provided 
only in binary form, or we have a program whose source code is too large
 for us to easily read to determine which capabilities might be required
 to run it. If the program requires privileges, but shouldn’t be a 
set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span> program, then how can we determine the permitted capabilities to assign to the executable file with <span class="docEmphasis">setcap(8)</span>? There are two ways to answer this question:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Use <span class="docEmphasis">strace(1)</span> (Appendix A) to see which system call fails with the error <tt>EPERM</tt>,
 the error used to indicate the lack of a required capability. By 
consulting the system call’s manual page or the kernel source code, we 
can then deduce what capability is required. This approach isn’t 
perfect, because an <tt>EPERM</tt> error can 
occasionally be generated for other reasons, some of which may have 
nothing to do with the capability requirements for the program. 
Furthermore, programs may legitimately make a system call that requires 
privilege, and then change their behavior after determining that they 
don’t have privilege for a particular operation. It can sometimes be 
difficult to distinguish such “false positives” when trying to determine
 the capabilities that an executable really does need.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Use
 a kernel probe to produce monitoring output when the kernel is asked to
 perform capability checks. An example of how to do this is provided in 
[Hallyn, 2007], an article written by one of the developers of file 
capabilities. For each request to check a capability, the probe shown in
 the article logs the kernel function that was called, the capability 
that was requested, and the name of the requesting program. Although 
this approach requires more work than the use of <span class="docEmphasis">strace(1)</span>, it can also help us more accurately determine the capabilities that a program requires.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
