<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>39.10. Older Kernels and Systems Without File Capabilities</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">39.10. Older Kernels and Systems Without File Capabilities</h3><p class="docText">In
 this section, we describe various differences in the implementation of 
capabilities in older kernels. We also describe the differences that 
occur on kernels where file capabilities are not supported. There are 
two scenarios where Linux doesn’t support file capabilities:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Before Linux 2.6.24, file capabilities were not implemented.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Since Linux 2.6.24, file capabilities can be disabled if the kernel is built without the <tt>CONFIG_SECURITY_FILE_CAPABILITIES</tt> option.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Although
 Linux introduced capabilities and allowed them to be attached to 
processes starting with kernel 2.2, the implementation of file 
capabilities appeared only several years later. The reasons that file 
capabilities remained unimplemented for so long were matters of policy, 
rather than technical difficulties. (Extended attributes, described in Chapter 16,
 which are used to implement file capabilities, had been available since
 kernel 2.6.) The weight of opinion among kernel developers was that 
requiring system administrators to set and monitor different sets of 
capabilities—some of whose consequences are subtle but far-reaching—for 
each privileged program would create an unmanageably complex 
administration task. By contrast, system administrators are familiar 
with the existing UNIX privilege model, know to treat set-user-ID 
programs with due caution, and can locate the set-user-ID and 
set-group-ID programs on a system using simple <span class="docEmphasis">find</span>
 commands. Nevertheless, the developers of file capabilities made the 
case that file capabilities could be made administratively workable, and
 eventually provided a convincing enough argument that file capabilities
 were integrated into the kernel.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWFHK">39.10.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E1FHK">39.10.1.1. The <tt>CAP_SETPCAP</tt> capability</h5><p class="docText">On
 kernels that don’t support file capabilities (i.e., any kernel before 
2.6.24, and kernels since 2.6.24 with file capabilities disabled), the 
semantics of the <tt>CAP_SETPCAP</tt> capability are different. Subject to rules that are analogous to those described in Section 39.7, a process that has the <tt>CAP_SETPCAP</tt>
 capability in its effective set can theoretically change the 
capabilities of processes other than itself. Changes can be made to the 
capabilities of another process, all of the members of a specified 
process group, or all processes on the system except <span class="docEmphasis">init</span> and the caller itself. The final case excludes <span class="docEmphasis">init</span>
 because it is fundamental to the operation of the system. It also 
excludes the caller because the caller may be attempting to remove 
capabilities from every other process on the system, and we don’t want 
to remove the capabilities from the calling process itself.</p><p class="docText">However,
 changing the capabilities of other processes is only a theoretical 
possibility. On older kernels, and on modern kernels where support for 
file capabilities is disabled, the capability bounding set (discussed 
next) always masks out the <tt>CAP_SETPCAP</tt> capability.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EKHHK">39.10.1.2. The capability bounding set</h5><p class="docText">Since
 Linux 2.6.25, the capability bounding set is a per-process attribute. 
However, on older kernels, the capability bounding set is a system-wide 
attribute that affects all processes on the system. The system-wide 
capability bounding set is initialized so that it always masks out <tt>CAP_SETPCAP</tt> (described above).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On
 kernels after 2.6.25, removing capabilities from the per-process 
bounding set is supported only if file capabilities are enabled in the 
kernel. In that case, <span class="docEmphasis">init</span>,
 the ancestor of all processes, starts with a bounding set containing 
all capabilities, and a copy of that bounding set is inherited by other 
processes created on the system. If file capabilities are disabled, 
then, because of the differences in the semantics of <tt>CAP_SETPCAP</tt> described above, <span class="docEmphasis">init</span> starts with a bounding set that contains all capabilities except <tt>CAP_SETPCAP</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">There is one further change in the semantics of the capability bounding set in Linux 2.6.25. As noted earlier (Section 39.5.1),
 on Linux 2.6.25 and later, the per-process capability bounding set acts
 as a limiting superset for the capabilities that can be added to the 
process’s inheritable set. In Linux 2.6.24 and earlier, the system-wide 
capability bounding set doesn’t have this masking effect. (It is not 
needed, because these kernels don’t support file capabilities.)</p><p class="docText">The system-wide capability bounding set is accessible via the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/sys/kernel/cap-bound</tt> file. A process must have the <tt>CAP_SYS_MODULE</tt> capability to be able to change the contents of <tt>cap-bound</tt>. However, only the <span class="docEmphasis">init</span>
 process can turn bits on in this mask; other privileged processes can 
only turn bits off. The upshot of these limitations is that on a system 
where file capabilities are not supported, we can never give the <tt>CAP_SETPCAP</tt>
 capability to a process. This is reasonable, since that capability can 
be used to subvert the entire kernel privilege-checking system. (In the 
unlikely case that we want to change this limitation, we must either 
load a kernel module that changes the value in the set, modify the 
source code of the <span class="docEmphasis">init</span> program, or change the initialization of the capability bounding set in the kernel source code and perform a kernel rebuild.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Confusingly,
 although it is a bit mask, the value in the system-wide cap-bound file 
is displayed as a signed decimal number. For example, the initial value 
of this file is -257. This is the two’s complement interpretation of the
 bit mask with all bits except <span class="docEmphasis">(1 &lt;&lt; 8)</span> turned on (i.e., in binary, 11111111 11111111 11111110 11111111); <tt>CAP_SETPCAP</tt> has the value 8.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E5JHK">39.10.1.3. Using capabilities within a program on a system without file capabilities</h5><p class="docText">Even
 on a system that doesn’t support file capabilities, we can nevertheless
 employ capabilities to improve the security of a program. We do this as
 follows:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Run the program in a process with an effective user ID of 0 (typically a set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span> program). Such a process is granted all capabilities (except <tt>CAP_SETPCAP</tt>, as noted earlier) in its permitted and effective sets.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">On program startup, use the <span class="docEmphasis">libcap</span>
 API to drop all capabilities from the effective set, and drop all 
capabilities except those that we may later need from the permitted set.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Set the <tt>SECBIT_KEEP_CAPS</tt> flag (or use the <span class="docEmphasis">prctl()</span> <tt>PR_SET_KEEPCAPS</tt> operation to achieve the same result), so that the next step does not drop capabilities.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Set all user IDs to nonzero values, to prevent the process from accessing files owned by <span class="docEmphasis">root</span> or gaining capabilities by doing an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">We could replace the two preceding steps by a single step that sets the <tt>SECBIT_NOROOT</tt> flag, if we want to prevent the process from regaining privileges on an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, but must allow it to access files owned by <span class="docEmphasis">root</span>. (Of course, allowing access to files owned by <span class="docEmphasis">root</span> leaves open the risk of some security vulnerability.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">During the rest of the program’s lifetime, use the <span class="docEmphasis">libcap</span>
 API to raise and drop the remaining permitted capabilities from the 
effective set as needed in order to perform privileged tasks.</p><p class="docList">Some applications built for Linux kernels before version 2.6.24 employed this approach.</p></div></li></ol></div><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Among
 the kernel developers who argued against the implementation of 
capabilities for executable files, one of the perceived virtues of the 
approach described in the main text was that the developer of an 
application knows which capabilities an executable requires. By 
contrast, a system administrator may not be able to easily determine 
this information.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
