<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>40.1. Overview of the utmp and wtmp Files</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">40.1. Overview of the <tt>utmp</tt> and <tt>wtmp</tt> Files</h3><p class="docText">UNIX systems maintain two data files containing information about users logging in and out of the system:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <tt>utmp</tt>
 file maintains a record of users currently logged in to the system (as 
well as certain other information that we describe later). As each user 
logs in, a record is written to the <tt>utmp</tt> file. One of the fields in this record, <span class="docEmphasis">ut_user</span>, records the login name of the user. This record is later erased on logout. Programs such as <span class="docEmphasis">who(1)</span> use the information in the <tt>utmp</tt> file to display a list of currently logged-in users.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>wtmp</tt>
 file is an audit trail of all user logins and logouts (as well as 
certain other information that we describe later). On each login, a 
record containing the same information as is written to the <tt>utmp</tt> file is appended to the <tt>wtmp</tt> file. On logout, a further record is appended to the file. This record contains the same information, except that the <span class="docEmphasis">ut_user</span> field is zeroed out. The <span class="docEmphasis">last(1)</span> command can be used to display and filter the contents of the <tt>wtmp</tt> file.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">On Linux, the <tt>utmp</tt> file resides at <tt>/var/run/utmp</tt>, and the <tt>wtmp</tt> file resides at <tt>/var/log/wtmp</tt>. In general, applications don’t need to know about these pathnames, since they are compiled into <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>. Programs that do need to refer to the locations of these files should use the <tt>_PATH_UTMP</tt> and <tt>_PATH_WTMP</tt> pathname constants, defined in <tt>&lt;paths.h&gt;</tt> (and <tt>&lt;utmpx.h&gt;</tt>), rather than explicitly coding pathnames into the program.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">SUSv3 doesn’t standardize any symbolic names for the pathnames of the <tt>utmp</tt> and <tt>wtmp</tt> files. The names <tt>_PATH_UTMP</tt> and <tt>_PATH_WTMP</tt> are used on Linux and the BSDs. Many other UNIX implementations instead define the constants <tt>UTMP_FILE</tt> and <tt>WTMP_FILE</tt> for these pathnames. Linux also defines these names in <tt>&lt;utmp.h&gt;</tt>, but doesn’t define them in <tt>&lt;utmpx.h&gt;</tt> or <tt>&lt;paths.h&gt;</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
