<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>40.2. The utmpx API</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">40.2. The <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span> API</h3><p class="docText">The <tt>utmp</tt> and <tt>wtmp</tt>
 files have been present in the UNIX system since early times, but 
underwent steady evolution and divergence across various UNIX 
implementations, especially BSD versus System V. System V Release 4 
greatly extended the API, in the process creating a new (parallel) <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span> structure and associated <tt>utmpx</tt> and <tt>wtmpx</tt> files. The letter <span class="docEmphasis">x</span>
 was likewise included in the names of header files and additional 
functions for processing these new files. Many other UNIX 
implementations also added their own extensions to the API.</p><p class="docText">In this chapter, we describe the Linux <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span> API, which is a hybrid of the BSD and System V implementations. Linux doesn’t follow System V in creating parallel <tt>utmpx</tt> and <tt>wtmpx</tt> files; instead, the <tt>utmp</tt> and <tt>wtmp</tt>
 files contain all of the required information. However, for 
compatibility with other UNIX implementations, Linux provides both the 
traditional <span class="docEmphasis">utmp</span> and the System V-derived <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span>
 APIs for accessing the contents of these files. On Linux, these two 
APIs return exactly the same information. (One of the few differences 
between the two APIs is that the <span class="docEmphasis">utmp</span> API contains reentrant versions of a few functions, while the <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span>
 API does not.) However, we confine our discussion to the utmpx 
interface, since that is the API specified in SUSv3 and is thus 
preferred for portability to other UNIX implementations.</p><p class="docText">The SUSv3 specification doesn’t cover all aspects of the <tt>utmpx</tt> API (e.g., the locations of the <tt>utmp</tt> and <tt>wtmp</tt>
 files are not specified). The precise contents of the login accounting 
files differ somewhat across implementations, and various 
implementations provide additional login accounting functions that are 
not specified in SUSv3.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Chapter 17 of [Frisch, 2002] summarizes some of the variations in the location and use of the <tt>wtmp</tt> and <tt>utmp</tt> files across different UNIX implementations. It also describes the use of the <span class="docEmphasis">ac(1)</span> command, which can be used to summarize login information from the <tt>wtmp</tt> file.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
