<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>40.3. The utmpx Structure</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">40.3. The <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span> Structure</h3><p class="docText">The <tt>utmp</tt> and <tt>wtmp</tt> files consist of <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span> records. The <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span> structure is defined in <tt>&lt;utmpx.h&gt;</tt>, as shown in Example 40-1.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The SUSv3 specification of the <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span> structure doesn’t include the <span class="docEmphasis">ut_host</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ut_exit</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ut_session</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">ut_addr_v6</span> fields. The <span class="docEmphasis">ut_host</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ut_exit</span> fields are present on most other implementations; <span class="docEmphasis">ut_session</span> is present on a few other implementations; and <span class="docEmphasis">ut_addr_v6</span> is Linux-specific. SUSv3 specifies the <span class="docEmphasis">ut_line</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ut_user</span> fields, but leaves their lengths unspecified.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">int32_t</span> data type used to define the <span class="docEmphasis">ut_addr_v6</span> field of the <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span> structure is a 32-bit integer.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EOOHK">Example 40-1. Definition of the <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span> structure</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight">#define _GNU_SOURCE             /* Without _GNU_SOURCE the two field
struct exit_status {               names below are prepended by "__" */
    short e_termination;        /* Process termination status (signal) */
    short e_exit;               /* Process exit status */
};

#define __UT_LINESIZE    32
#define __UT_NAMESIZE    32
#define __UT_HOSTSIZE   256

struct utmpx {
    short ut_type;                      /* Type of record */
    pid_t ut_pid;                       /* PID of login process */
    char  ut_line[__UT_LINESIZE];       /* Terminal device name */
    char  ut_id[4];                     /* Suffix from terminal name, or
                                           ID field from inittab(5) */
    char  ut_user[__UT_NAMESIZE];       /* Username */
    char  ut_host[__UT_HOSTSIZE];       /* Hostname for remote login, or kernel
                                           version for run-level messages */
    struct exit_status ut_exit;         /* Exit status of process marked
                                           as DEAD_PROCESS (not filled
                                           in by init(8) on Linux) */
    long  ut_session;                   /* Session ID */
    struct timeval ut_tv;               /* Time when entry was made */
    int32_t ut_addr_v6[4];              /* IP address of remote host (IPv4
                                           address uses just ut_addr_v6[0],
                                           with other elements set to 0) */
    char __unused[20];                  /* Reserved for future use */
};

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">Each of the string fields in the <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span> structure is null-terminated unless it completely fills the corresponding array.</p><p class="docText">For login processes, the information stored in the <span class="docEmphasis">ut_line</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ut_id</span> fields is derived from the name of the terminal device. The <span class="docEmphasis">ut_line</span> field contains the complete filename of the terminal device. The <span class="docEmphasis">ut_id</span> field contains the suffix part of the filename—that is, the string following <span class="docEmphasis">tty</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">pts</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">pty</span> (the last two are for System-V and BSD-style pseudoterminals, respectively). Thus, for the terminal <tt>/dev/tty2</tt>, <span class="docEmphasis">ut_line</span> would be <span class="docEmphasis">tty2</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ut_id</span> would be <span class="docEmphasis">2</span>.</p><p class="docText">In a windowing environment, some terminal emulators use the <span class="docEmphasis">ut_session</span> field to record the session ID for the terminal window. (Refer to Section 34.3 for an explanation of session IDs.)</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">ut_type</span>
 field is an integer defining the type of record being written to the 
file. The following set of constants (with their corresponding numeric 
values shown in parentheses) can be used as values for this field:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">EMPTY</span></span> (0)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This record doesn’t contain valid accounting information.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">RUN_LVL</span></span> (1)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This
 record indicates a change in the system’s run-level during system 
startup or shutdown. (Information about run-levels can be found in the <span class="docEmphasis">init(8)</span> manual page.) The <tt>_GNU_SOURCE</tt> feature test macro must be defined in order to obtain the definition of this constant from <tt>&lt;utmpx.h&gt;</tt>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">BOOT_TIME</span></span> (2)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This record contains the time of system boot in the <span class="docEmphasis">ut_tv</span> field. The usual author of <tt>RUN_LVL</tt> and <tt>BOOT_TIME</tt> records is <span class="docEmphasis">init</span>. These records are written to both the <tt>utmp</tt> file and the <tt>wtmp</tt> file.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">NEW_TIME</span></span> (3)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This record contains the new time after a system clock change, recorded in the <span class="docEmphasis">ut_tv</span> field.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">OLD_TIME</span></span> (4)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This record contains the old time before a system clock change, recorded in the <span class="docEmphasis">ut_tv</span> field. Records of type <tt>OLD_TIME</tt> and <tt>NEW_TIME</tt> are written to the <tt>utmp</tt> and <tt>wtmp</tt> files by the NTP (or a similar) daemon when it makes changes to the system clock.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">INIT_PROCESS</span></span> (5)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is a record for a process spawned by <span class="docEmphasis">init</span>, such as a <span class="docEmphasis">getty</span> process. Refer to the <span class="docEmphasis">inittab(5)</span> manual page for details.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">LOGIN_PROCESS</span></span> (6)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is a record for a session leader process for a user login, such as a <span class="docEmphasis">login(1)</span> process.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">USER_PROCESS</span></span> (7)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is a record for a user process, usually a login session, with the username appearing in the <span class="docEmphasis">ut_user</span> field. The login session may have been started by <span class="docEmphasis">login(1)</span> or by some application offering a remote login facility, such as <span class="docEmphasis">ftp</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">ssh</span>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">DEAD_PROCESS</span></span> (8)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This record identifies a process that has exited.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">We
 show the numeric values of these constants because various applications
 depend on the constants having the above numerical order. For example, 
in the source code of the <span class="docEmphasis">agetty</span> program, we find checks such as the following:</p><pre>utp-&gt;ut_type &gt;= INIT_PROCESS &amp;&amp; utp-&gt;ut_type &lt;= DEAD_PROCESS</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Records of the type <tt>INIT_PROCESS</tt> usually correspond to invocations of <span class="docEmphasis">getty(8)</span> (or a similar program, such as <span class="docEmphasis">agetty(8)</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">mingetty(8)</span>). On system boot, the <span class="docEmphasis">init</span> process creates a child for each terminal line and virtual console, and each child execs the <span class="docEmphasis">getty</span> program. The <span class="docEmphasis">getty</span> program opens the terminal, prompts the user for a login name, and then execs <span class="docEmphasis">login(1)</span>. After successfully validating the user and performing various other steps, <span class="docEmphasis">login</span>
 forks a child that execs the user’s login shell. The complete life of 
such a login session is represented by four records written to the <tt>wtmp</tt> file in the following order:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">an <tt>INIT_PROCESS</tt> record, written by <span class="docEmphasis">init</span>;</p></li><li><p class="docList">a <tt>LOGIN_PROCESS</tt> record, written by <span class="docEmphasis">getty</span>;</p></li><li><p class="docList">a <tt>USER_PROCESS</tt> record, written by <span class="docEmphasis">login</span>; and</p></li><li><p class="docList">a <tt>DEAD_PROCESS</tt> record, written by <span class="docEmphasis">init</span> when it detects the death of the child <span class="docEmphasis">login</span> process (which occurs on user logout).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Further details on the operation of <span class="docEmphasis">getty</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">login</span> during user login can be found in Chapter 9 of [Stevens &amp; Rago, 2005].</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Some versions of <span class="docEmphasis">init</span> spawn the <span class="docEmphasis">getty</span> process before updating the <tt>wtmp</tt> file. Consequently, <span class="docEmphasis">init</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getty</span> race with each other to update the <tt>wtmp</tt> file, with the result that the <tt>INIT_PROCESS</tt> and <tt>LOGIN_PROCESS</tt> records may be written in the opposite order from that described in the main text.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
