<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>40.4. Retrieving Information from the utmp and wtmp Files</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">40.4. Retrieving Information from the <tt>utmp</tt> and <tt>wtmp</tt> Files</h3><p class="docText">The functions described in this section retrieve records from files containing <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span>-format records. By default, these functions use the standard <tt>utmp</tt> file, but this can be changed using the <span class="docEmphasis">utmpxname()</span> function (described below).</p><p class="docText">These functions employ the notion of a <span class="docEmphasis">current location</span> within the file from which they are retrieving records. This location is updated by each function.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">setutxent()</span> function rewinds the <tt>utmp</tt> file to the beginning.</p><pre>#include &lt;utmpx.h&gt;

void <b>setutxent</b>(void);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Normally, we should call <span class="docEmphasis">setutxent()</span> before employing any of the <span class="docEmphasis">getutx*()</span>
 functions (described below). This prevents possible confusion that 
might result if some third-party function that we have called has 
previously made use of these functions. Depending on the task being 
performed, it may also be necessary to call <span class="docEmphasis">setutxent()</span> again at appropriate points later in a program.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">setutxent()</span> function and the <span class="docEmphasis">getutx*()</span> functions open the <tt>utmp</tt> file if it is not already open. When we have finished using the file, we can close it with the <span class="docEmphasis">endutxent()</span> function.</p><pre>#include &lt;utmpx.h&gt;

void <b>endutxent</b>(void);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getutxent()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">getutxid()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">getutxline()</span> functions read a record from the <tt>utmp</tt> file and return a pointer to a (statically allocated) <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span> structure.</p><pre>#include &lt;utmpx.h&gt;

struct utmpx *<b>getutxent</b>(void);
struct utmpx *<b>getutxid</b>(const struct utmpx *<span class="docEmphasis">ut</span>);
struct utmpx *<b>getutxline</b>(const struct utmpx *<span class="docEmphasis">ut</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">All return a pointer to a statically allocated <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span> structure, or <tt>NULL</tt> if no matching record or EOF was encountered</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getutxent()</span> function retrieves the next sequential record from the <tt>utmp</tt> file. The <span class="docEmphasis">getutxid()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getutxline()</span> functions perform searches, starting from the current file location, for a record matching the criteria specified in the <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span> structure pointed to by the <span class="docEmphasis">ut</span> argument.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getutxid()</span> function searches the <tt>utmp</tt> file for a record based on the values specified in the <span class="docEmphasis">ut_type</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ut_id</span> fields of the <span class="docEmphasis">ut</span> argument:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">If the <span class="docEmphasis">ut_type</span> field is <tt>RUN_LVL</tt>, <tt>BOOT_TIME</tt>, <tt>NEW_TIME</tt>, or <tt>OLD_TIME</tt>, then <span class="docEmphasis">getutxid()</span> finds the next record whose <span class="docEmphasis">ut_type</span>
 field matches the specified value. (Records of these types don’t 
correspond to user logins.) This permits searches for records of changes
 to the system time and run-level.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If the <span class="docEmphasis">ut_type</span> field is one of the remaining valid values (<tt>INIT_PROCESS</tt>, <tt>LOGIN_PROCESS</tt>, <tt>USER_PROCESS</tt>, or <tt>DEAD_PROCESS</tt>), then <span class="docEmphasis">getutxent()</span> finds the next record whose <span class="docEmphasis">ut_type</span> field matches <span class="docEmphasis">any</span> of these values and whose <span class="docEmphasis">ut_id</span> field matches that specified in its <span class="docEmphasis">ut</span> argument. This permits scanning the file for records corresponding to a particular terminal.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getutxline()</span> function searches forward for a record whose <span class="docEmphasis">ut_type</span> field is either <tt>LOGIN_PROCESS</tt> or <tt>USER_PROCESS</tt>, and whose <span class="docEmphasis">ut_line</span> field matches that specified in the <span class="docEmphasis">ut</span> argument. This is useful for finding records corresponding to user logins.</p><p class="docText">Both <span class="docEmphasis">getutxid()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getutxline()</span> return <tt>NULL</tt> if the search fails (i.e., end-of-file is encountered without finding a matching record).</p><p class="docText">On some UNIX implementations, <span class="docEmphasis">getutxline()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getutxid()</span> treat the static area used for returning the <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span> structure as a kind of cache. If they determine that the record placed in this cache by a previous <span class="docEmphasis">getutx*()</span>
 call matches the criteria specified in ut, then no file read is 
performed; the call simply returns the same record once more (SUSv3 
permits this behavior). Therefore, to prevent the same record from being
 repeatedly returned when calling <span class="docEmphasis">getutxline()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getutxid()</span> within a loop, we must zero out this static data structure, using code such as the following:</p><pre>struct utmpx *res = NULL;

/* Other code omitted */

if (res != NULL)            /* If 'res' was set via a previous call */
    memset(res, 0, sizeof(struct utmpx));
res = getutxline(&amp;ut);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>
 implementation doesn’t perform this type of caching, but we should 
nevertheless employ this technique for the sake of portability.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Because the <span class="docEmphasis">getutx*()</span>
 functions return a pointer to a statically allocated structure, they 
are not reentrant. The GNU C library provides reentrant versions of the 
traditional <span class="docEmphasis">utmp</span> functions (<span class="docEmphasis">getutent_r()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">getutid_r()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">getutline_r()</span>), but doesn’t provide reentrant versions of their <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span> counterparts. (SUSv3 doesn’t specify the reentrant versions.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">By default, all of the <span class="docEmphasis">getutx*()</span> functions work on the standard <tt>utmp</tt> file. If we want to use another file, such as the <tt>wtmp</tt> file, then we must first call <span class="docEmphasis">utmpxname()</span>, specifying the desired pathname.</p><pre>#define _GNU_SOURCE
#include &lt;utmpx.h&gt;

int <b>utmpxname</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">file</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">utmpxname()</span>
 function merely records a copy of the pathname given to it. It doesn’t 
open the file, but does close any file previously opened by one of the 
other calls. This means that <span class="docEmphasis">utmpxname()</span> doesn’t return an error if an invalid pathname is specified. Instead, when one of the <span class="docEmphasis">getutx*()</span> functions is later called, it will return an error (i.e., <tt>NULL</tt>, with <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> set to <tt>ENOENT</tt>) when it fails to open the file.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Although not specified in SUSv3, most UNIX implementations provide <span class="docEmphasis">utmpxname()</span> or the analogous <span class="docEmphasis">utmpname()</span> function.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESYHK">40.4.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EWYHK">40.4.1.1. Example program</h5><p class="docText">The program in Example 40-2<a name="section to"></a> uses some of the functions described in this section to dump the contents of a <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span>-format file. The following shell session log demonstrates the results when we use this program to dump the contents of <tt>/var/run/utmp</tt> (the default used by these functions if <span class="docEmphasis">utmpxname()</span> is not called):</p><pre>$ <b>./dump_utmpx</b>
user     type        PID line   id  host      date/time
LOGIN    LOGIN_PR   1761 tty1   1             Sat Oct 23 09:29:37 2010
LOGIN    LOGIN_PR   1762 tty2   2             Sat Oct 23 09:29:37 2010
lynley   USER_PR   10482 tty3   3             Sat Oct 23 10:19:43 2010
david    USER_PR    9664 tty4   4             Sat Oct 23 10:07:50 2010
liz      USER_PR    1985 tty5   5             Sat Oct 23 10:50:12 2010
mtk      USER_PR   10111 pts/0  /0            Sat Oct 23 09:30:57 2010</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">For brevity, we edited out much of the output produced by the program. The lines matching <tt>tty1</tt> to <tt>tty5</tt> are for logins on virtual consoles (<tt>/dev/tty[1-6]</tt>). The last line of output is for an <span class="docEmphasis">xterm</span> session on a pseudoterminal.</p><p class="docText">The following output produced by dumping <tt>/var/log/wtmp</tt> shows that when a user logs in and out, two records are written to the <tt>wtmp</tt> file. (We edited out all of the other output produced by the program.) By searching sequentially through the <tt>wtmp</tt> file (using <span class="docEmphasis">getutxline()</span>), these records can be matched via the <span class="docEmphasis">ut_line</span> field.</p><pre>$ <b>./dump_utmpx /var/log/wtmp</b>
user     type        PID line   id  host      date/time
lynley   USER_PR   10482 tty3   3             Sat Oct 23 10:19:43 2010
         DEAD_PR   10482 tty3   3   2.4.20-4G Sat Oct 23 10:32:54 2010</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E61HK">Example 40-2. Displaying the contents of a <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span>-format file</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>loginacct/dump_utmpx.c</b>
#define _GNU_SOURCE
#include &lt;time.h&gt;
#include &lt;utmpx.h&gt;
#include &lt;paths.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    struct utmpx *ut;

    if (argc &gt; 1 &amp;&amp; strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s [utmp-pathname]\n", argv[0]);

    if (argc &gt; 1)               /* Use alternate file if supplied */
        if (utmpxname(argv[1]) == -1)
            errExit("utmpxname");

    setutxent();

    printf("user     type        PID line   id  host      date/time\n");

    while ((ut = getutxent()) != NULL) {        /* Sequential scan to EOF */
        printf("%-8s ", ut-&gt;ut_user);
        printf("%-9.9s ",
                (ut-&gt;ut_type == EMPTY) ?         "EMPTY" :
                (ut-&gt;ut_type == RUN_LVL) ?       "RUN_LVL" :
                (ut-&gt;ut_type == BOOT_TIME) ?     "BOOT_TIME" :
                (ut-&gt;ut_type == NEW_TIME) ?      "NEW_TIME" :
                (ut-&gt;ut_type == OLD_TIME) ?      "OLD_TIME" :
                (ut-&gt;ut_type == INIT_PROCESS) ?  "INIT_PR" :
                (ut-&gt;ut_type == LOGIN_PROCESS) ? "LOGIN_PR" :
                (ut-&gt;ut_type == USER_PROCESS) ?  "USER_PR" :
                (ut-&gt;ut_type == DEAD_PROCESS) ?  "DEAD_PR" : "???");
        printf("%5ld %-6.6s %-3.5s %-9.9s ", (long) ut-&gt;ut_pid,
                ut-&gt;ut_line, ut-&gt;ut_id, ut-&gt;ut_host);
        printf("%s", ctime((time_t *) &amp;(ut-&gt;ut_tv.tv_sec)));
    }

    endutxent();
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>loginacct/dump_utmpx.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
