<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>40.5. Retrieving the Login Name: getlogin()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">40.5. Retrieving the Login Name: <span class="docEmphasis">getlogin()</span></h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getlogin()</span>
 function returns the name of the user logged in on the controlling 
terminal of the calling process. This function uses the information 
maintained in the <tt>utmp</tt> file.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

char *<b>getlogin</b>(void);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns pointer to username string, or <tt>NULL</tt> on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getlogin()</span> function calls <span class="docEmphasis">ttyname()</span> (Section 62.10) to find the name of the terminal associated with the calling process’s standard input. It then searches the <tt>utmp</tt> file for a record whose <span class="docEmphasis">ut_line</span> value matches this terminal name. If a matching record is found, then <span class="docEmphasis">getlogin()</span> returns the <span class="docEmphasis">ut_user</span> string from that record.</p><p class="docText">If a match is not found or an error occurs, then <span class="docEmphasis">getlogin()</span> returns <tt>NULL</tt> and sets <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> to indicate the error. One reason <span class="docEmphasis">getlogin()</span> may fail is that the process doesn’t have a terminal associated with its standard input (<tt>ENOTTY</tt>), perhaps because it is daemon. Another possibility is that this terminal session is not recorded in <tt>utmp</tt>; for example, some software terminal emulators don’t create entries in the <tt>utmp</tt> file.</p><p class="docText">Even in the (unusual) case where a user ID has multiple login names in <tt>/etc/passwd</tt>, <span class="docEmphasis">getlogin()</span> is able to return the actual username that was used to log in on this terminal because it relies on the <tt>utmp</tt> file. By contrast, using <span class="docEmphasis">getpwuid(getuid())</span> always retrieves the first matching record from <tt>/etc/passwd</tt>, regardless of the name that was used to log in.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">A reentrant version of <span class="docEmphasis">getlogin()</span> is specified by SUSv3, in the form of <span class="docEmphasis">getlogin_r()</span>, and this function is provided by <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>.</p><p class="docText">The <tt>LOGNAME</tt>
 environment variable can also be used to find a user’s login name. 
However, the value of this variable can be changed by the user, which 
means that it can’t be used to securely identify a user.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
