<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>40.6. Updating the utmp and wtmp Files for a Login Session</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">40.6. Updating the <tt>utmp</tt> and <tt>wtmp</tt> Files for a Login Session</h3><p class="docText">When writing an application that creates a login session (in the manner of, say, <span class="docEmphasis">login</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">sshd</span>), we should update the <tt>utmp</tt> and <tt>wtmp</tt> files as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">On login, a record should be written to the <tt>utmp</tt> file to indicate that this user logged in. The application must check whether a record for this terminal already exists in the <tt>utmp</tt> file. If a previous record exists, it is overwritten; otherwise, a new record is appended to the file. Often, calling <span class="docEmphasis">pututxline()</span> (described shortly) is enough to ensure that these steps are correctly performed (see Example 40-3 for an example). The output <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span> record should have at least the <span class="docEmphasis">ut_type</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ut_user</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ut_tv</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ut_pid</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ut_id</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">ut_line</span> fields filled in. The <span class="docEmphasis">ut_type</span> field should be set to <tt>USER_PROCESS</tt>. The <span class="docEmphasis">ut_id</span>
 field should contain the suffix of the name of the device (i.e., the 
terminal or pseudoterminal) on which the user is logging in, and the <span class="docEmphasis">ut_line</span> field should contain the name of the login device, with the leading <tt>/dev/</tt> string removed. (Examples of the contents of these two fields are shown in the sample runs of the program in Example 40-2.) A record containing exactly the same information is appended to the <tt>wtmp</tt> file.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The terminal name acts (via the <span class="docEmphasis">ut_line</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ut_id</span> fields) as a unique key for records in the <tt>utmp</tt> file.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li><li><p class="docList">On logout, the record previously written to the <tt>utmp</tt> file should be erased. This is done by creating a record with <span class="docEmphasis">ut_type</span> set to <tt>DEAD_PROCESS</tt>, and with the same <span class="docEmphasis">ut_id</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ut_line</span> values as the record written during login, but with the <span class="docEmphasis">ut_user</span> field zeroed out. This record is written over the earlier record. A copy of the same record is appended to the <tt>wtmp</tt> file.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">If we fail to clean up the <span class="docEmphasis">utmp</span> record on logout, perhaps because of a program crash, then, on the next reboot, <span class="docEmphasis">init</span> automatically cleans up the record, setting its <span class="docEmphasis">ut_type</span> to <tt>DEAD_PROCESS</tt> and zeroing out various other fields of the record.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li></ul><p class="docText">The <tt>utmp</tt> and <tt>wtmp</tt> files are normally protected so that only privileged users can perform updates on these files. The accuracy of <span class="docEmphasis">getlogin()</span> depends on the integrity of the <tt>utmp</tt> file. For this, as well as other reasons, the permissions on the <tt>utmp</tt> and <tt>wtmp</tt> files should never be set to allow writing by unprivileged users.</p><p class="docText">What qualifies as a login session? As we might expect, logins via <span class="docEmphasis">login</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">telnet</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">ssh</span> are recorded in the login accounting files. Most <span class="docEmphasis">ftp</span>
 implementations also create login accounting records. However, are 
login accounting records created for each terminal window started on the
 system or for invocations of <span class="docEmphasis">su</span>, for example? The answer to that question varies across UNIX implementations.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Under some terminal emulator programs (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">xterm</span>), command-line options or other mechanisms can be used to determine whether the program updates the login accounting files.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pututxline()</span> function writes the <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span> structure pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">ut</span> into the <tt>/var/run/utmp</tt> file (or an alternative file if <span class="docEmphasis">utmpxname()</span> was previously called).</p><pre>#include &lt;utmpx.h&gt;

struct utmpx *<b>pututxline</b>(const struct utmpx *<span class="docEmphasis">ut</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns pointer to copy of successfully updated record on success, or <tt>NULL</tt> on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Before writing the record, <span class="docEmphasis">pututxline()</span> first uses <span class="docEmphasis">getutxid()</span>
 to search forward for a record that may be overwritten. If such a 
record is found, it is overwritten; otherwise, a new record is appended 
to the end of the file. In many cases, an application precedes a call to
 <span class="docEmphasis">pututxline()</span> by a call to one of the <span class="docEmphasis">getutx*()</span> functions, which sets the current file location to the correct record—that is, one matching the <span class="docEmphasis">getutxid()</span>-style criteria in the <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span> structure pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">ut</span>. If <span class="docEmphasis">pututxline()</span> determines that this has occurred, it doesn’t call <span class="docEmphasis">getutxid()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">If <span class="docEmphasis">pututxline()</span> makes an internal call to <span class="docEmphasis">getutxid()</span>, this call doesn’t change the static area used by the <span class="docEmphasis">getutx*()</span> functions to return the <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span> structure. SUSv3 requires this behavior from an implementation.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">When updating the <tt>wtmp</tt> file, we simply open the file and append a record to it. Because this is a standard operation, <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> encapsulates it in the <span class="docEmphasis">updwtmpx()</span> function.</p><pre>#define _GNU_SOURCE
#include &lt;utmpx.h&gt;

void <b>updwtmpx</b>(char *<span class="docEmphasis">wtmpx_file</span>, struct utmpx *<span class="docEmphasis">ut</span>);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">updwtmpx()</span> function appends the <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx</span> record pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">ut</span> to the file specified in <span class="docEmphasis">wtmpx_file</span>.</p><p class="docText">SUSv3 doesn’t specify <span class="docEmphasis">updwtmpx()</span>, and it appears on only a few other UNIX implementations. Other implementations provide related functions—<span class="docEmphasis">login(3)</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">logout(3)</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">logwtmp(3)</span>—which are also in <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>
 and described in the manual pages. If such functions are not present, 
we need to write our own equivalents. (The implementation of these 
functions is not complex.)</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EHXHK">40.6.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ELXHK">40.6.1.1. Example program</h5><p class="docText">Example 40-3 uses the functions described in this section to update the <tt>utmp</tt> and <tt>wtmp</tt> files. This program performs the required updates to <tt>utmp</tt> and <tt>wtmp</tt>
 in order to log in the user named on the command line, and then, after 
sleeping a few seconds, log them out again. Normally, such actions would
 be associated with the creation and termination of a login session for a
 user. This program uses <span class="docEmphasis">ttyname()</span> to retrieve the name of the terminal device associated with a file descriptor. We describe <span class="docEmphasis">ttyname()</span> in Section 62.10.</p><p class="docText">The following shell session log demonstrates the operation of the program in Example 40-3.
 We assume privilege in order to be able to update the login accounting 
files, and then use the program to create a record for the user <span class="docEmphasis">mtk</span>:</p><pre>$ <b>su </b>
Password:
# <b>./utmpx_login mtk </b>
Creating login entries in utmp and wtmp
        using pid 1471, line pts/7, id /7
<i> Type Control-Z to suspend program</i>
[1]+  Stopped                 ./utmpx_login mtk</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">While the <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx_login</span> program was sleeping, we typed <span class="docEmphasis">Control-Z</span> to suspend the program and push it into the background. Next, we use the program in Example 40-2 to examine the contents of the <tt>utmp</tt> file:</p><pre># <b>./dump_utmpx /var/run/utmp</b>
user     type        PID line   id  host      date/time
cecilia  USER_PR     249 tty1   1             Fri Feb  1 21:39:07 2008
mtk      USER_PR    1471 pts/7  /7            Fri Feb  1 22:08:06 2008
# <b>who</b>
cecilia  tty1     Feb  1 21:39
mtk      pts/7    Feb  1 22:08</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Above, we used the <span class="docEmphasis">who(1)</span> command to show that the output of <span class="docEmphasis">who</span> derives from <span class="docEmphasis">utmp</span>.</p><p class="docText">Next we use our program to examine the contents of the <tt>wtmp</tt> file:</p><pre># <b>./dump_utmpx /var/log/wtmp</b>
user     type        PID line   id  host      date/time
cecilia  USER_PR     249 tty1   1             Fri Feb  1 21:39:07 2008
mtk      USER_PR    1471 pts/7  /7            Fri Feb  1 22:08:06 2008
# <b>last mtk</b>
mtk      pts/7                      Fri Feb  1 22:08   still logged in</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Above, we used the <span class="docEmphasis">last(1)</span> command to show that the output of last derives from <tt>wtmp</tt>. (For brevity, we have edited the output of the <span class="docEmphasis">dump_utmpx</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">last</span> commands in this shell session log to remove lines of output that are irrelevant to our discussion.)</p><p class="docText">Next, we use the <span class="docEmphasis">fg</span> command to resume the <span class="docEmphasis">utmpx_login</span> program in the foreground. It subsequently writes logout records to the <tt>utmp</tt> and <tt>wtmp</tt> files.</p><pre># <b>fg</b>
./utmpx_login mtk
Creating logout entries in utmp and wtmp</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We then once more examine the contents of the <tt>utmp</tt> file. We see that the <tt>utmp</tt> record was overwritten:</p><pre># <b>./dump_utmpx /var/run/utmp</b>
user     type        PID line   id  host      date/time
cecilia  USER_PR     249 tty1   1             Fri Feb  1 21:39:07 2008
         DEAD_PR    1471 pts/7  /7            Fri Feb  1 22:09:09 2008
# <b>who</b>
cecilia  tty1     Feb  1 21:39</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The final line of output shows that <span class="docEmphasis">who</span> ignored the <tt>DEAD_PROCESS</tt> record.</p><p class="docText">When we examine the <tt>wtmp</tt> file, we see that the <tt>wtmp</tt> record was superseded:</p><pre># <b>./dump_utmpx /var/log/wtmp</b>
user     type        PID line   id  host      date/time
cecilia  USER_PR     249 tty1   1             Fri Feb  1 21:39:07 2008
mtk      USER_PR    1471 pts/7  /7            Fri Feb  1 22:08:06 2008
         DEAD_PR    1471 pts/7  /7            Fri Feb  1 22:09:09 2008
# <b>last mtk</b>
mtk      pts/7                      Fri Feb  1 22:08 - 22:09  (00:01)</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The final line of output above demonstrates that <span class="docEmphasis">last</span> matches the login and logout records in <tt>wtmp</tt> to show the starting and ending times of the completed login session.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EU6HK">Example 40-3. Updating the <tt>utmp</tt> and <tt>wtmp</tt> files</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>loginacct/utmpx_login.c</b>
#define _GNU_SOURCE
#include &lt;time.h&gt;
#include &lt;utmpx.h&gt;
#include &lt;paths.h&gt;              /* Definitions of _PATH_UTMP and _PATH_WTMP */
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"
int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    struct utmpx ut;
    char *devName;

    if (argc &lt; 2 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s username [sleep-time]\n", argv[0]);

    /* Initialize login record for utmp and wtmp files */

    memset(&amp;ut, 0, sizeof(struct utmpx));
    ut.ut_type = USER_PROCESS;          /* This is a user login */
    strncpy(ut.ut_user, argv[1], sizeof(ut.ut_user));
    if (time((time_t *) &amp;ut.ut_tv.tv_sec) == -1)
        errExit("time");                /* Stamp with current time */
    ut.ut_pid = getpid();

    /* Set ut_line and ut_id based on the terminal associated with
       'stdin'. This code assumes terminals named "/dev/[pt]t[sy]*".
       The "/dev/" dirname is 5 characters; the "[pt]t[sy]" filename
       prefix is 3 characters (making 8 characters in all). */

    devName = ttyname(STDIN_FILENO);
    if (devName == NULL)
        errExit("ttyname");
    if (strlen(devName) &lt;= 8)           /* Should never happen */
        fatal("Terminal name is too short: %s", devName);

    strncpy(ut.ut_line, devName + 5, sizeof(ut.ut_line));
    strncpy(ut.ut_id, devName + 8, sizeof(ut.ut_id));

    printf("Creating login entries in utmp and wtmp\n");
    printf("        using pid %ld, line %.*s, id %.*s\n",
            (long) ut.ut_pid, (int) sizeof(ut.ut_line), ut.ut_line,
            (int) sizeof(ut.ut_id), ut.ut_id);

    setutxent();                        /* Rewind to start of utmp file */
    if (pututxline(&amp;ut) == NULL)        /* Write login record to utmp */
        errExit("pututxline");
    updwtmpx(_PATH_WTMP, &amp;ut);          /* Append login record to wtmp */

    /* Sleep a while, so we can examine utmp and wtmp files */

    sleep((argc &gt; 2) ? getInt(argv[2], GN_NONNEG, "sleep-time") : 15);

    /* Now do a "logout"; use values from previously initialized 'ut',
       except for changes below */

    ut.ut_type = DEAD_PROCESS;          /* Required for logout record */
    time((time_t *) &amp;ut.ut_tv.tv_sec);  /* Stamp with logout time */
    memset(&amp;ut.ut_user, 0, sizeof(ut.ut_user));
                                        /* Logout record has null username */
    printf("Creating logout entries in utmp and wtmp\n");
    setutxent();                        /* Rewind to start of utmp file */
    if (pututxline(&amp;ut) == NULL)        /* Overwrite previous utmp record */
        errExit("pututxline");
    updwtmpx(_PATH_WTMP, &amp;ut);          /* Append logout record to wtmp */

    endutxent();
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
      <b>loginacct/utmpx_login.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
