<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>41.1. Object Libraries</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">41.1. Object Libraries</h3><p class="docText">One
 way of building a program is simply to compile each of its source files
 to produce corresponding object files, and then link all of these 
object files together to produce the executable program, like so:</p><pre>$ <b>cc -g -c prog.c mod1.c mod2.c mod3.c</b>
$ <b>cc -g -o prog_nolib prog.o mod1.o mod2.o mod3.o</b></pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Linking is actually performed by the separate linker program, <span class="docEmphasis">ld</span>. When we link a program using the <span class="docEmphasis">cc</span> (or <span class="docEmphasis">gcc</span>) command, the compiler invokes <span class="docEmphasis">ld</span> behind the scenes. On Linux, the linker should always be invoked indirectly via <span class="docEmphasis">gcc</span>, since <span class="docEmphasis">gcc</span> ensures that <span class="docEmphasis">ld</span> is invoked with the correct options and links the program against the correct library files.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">In
 many cases, however, we may have source files that are used by several 
programs. As a first step toward saving ourselves some work, we could 
compile these source files just once, and then link them into different 
executables as required. Although this technique saves us compilation 
time, it still suffers from the disadvantage that we must name all of 
the object files during the link phase. Furthermore, our directories may
 be inconveniently cluttered with a large number of object files.</p><p class="docText">To get around these problems, we can group a set of object files into a single unit, known as an <span class="docEmphasis">object library</span>. Object libraries are of two types: <span class="docEmphasis">static</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">shared</span>.
 Shared libraries are the more modern type of object library, and 
provide several advantages over static libraries, as we describe in 
Section 41.3.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERSHK">41.1.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EVSHK">41.1.1.1. An aside: including debugger information when compiling a program</h5><p class="docText">In the <span class="docEmphasis">cc</span> command shown above, we used the <span class="docEmphasis">-g</span>
 option to include debugging information in the compiled program. In 
general, it is a good idea to always create programs and libraries that 
allow debugging. (In earlier times, debugging information was sometimes 
omitted so that the resulting executable used less disk and RAM, but 
nowadays disk and RAM are cheap.)</p><p class="docText">In addition, on some architectures, such as x86-32, the <span class="docEmphasis">-fomit-frame-pointer</span>
 option should not be specified because this makes debugging impossible.
 (On some architectures, such as x86-64, this option is enabled by 
default since it doesn’t prevent debugging.) For the same reason, 
executables and libraries should not be stripped of debugging 
information using <span class="docEmphasis">strip(1)</span>.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
