<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>41.2. Static Libraries</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">41.2. Static Libraries</h3><p class="docText">Before
 starting our discussion of shared libraries, we begin with a brief 
description of static libraries in order to make clear the differences 
and advantages of shared libraries.</p><p class="docText">Static libraries, also known as <span class="docEmphasis">archives</span>, were the first type of library to be provided on UNIX systems. They provide the following benefits:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">We
 can place a set of commonly used object files into a single library 
file that can then be used to build multiple executables, without 
needing to recompile the original source files when building each 
application.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Link
 commands become simpler. Instead of listing a long series of object 
files on the link command line, we specify just the name of the static 
library. The linker knows how to search the static library and extract 
the objects required by the executable.</p></li></ul><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDSHK">41.2.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EHSHK">41.2.1.1. Creating and maintaining a static library</h5><p class="docText">In
 effect, a static library is simply a file holding copies of all of the 
object files added to it. The archive also records various attributes of
 each of the component object files, including file permissions, numeric
 user and group IDs, and last modification time. By convention, static 
libraries have names of the form <tt>lib</tt><span class="docEmphasis">name</span><tt>.a</tt>.</p><p class="docText">A static library is created and maintained using the <span class="docEmphasis">ar(1)</span> command, which has the following general form:</p><pre>$ <b>ar</b> <b><tt><i>options archive object-file</i></tt></b>...</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">options</span> argument consists of a series of letters, one of which is the <span class="docEmphasis">operation code</span>, while the others are <span class="docEmphasis">modifiers</span> that influence the way the operation is carried out. Some commonly used operation codes are the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">r</span>
 (replace): Insert an object file into the archive, replacing any 
previous object file of the same name. This is the standard method for 
creating and updating an archive. Thus, we might build an archive with 
the following commands:</p><pre>$ <b>cc -g -c mod1.c mod2.c mod3.c</b>
$ <b>ar r libdemo.a mod1.o mod2.o mod3.o</b>
$ <b>rm mod1.o mod2.o mod3.o</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docList">As shown above, after building
 the library, we can delete the original object files if desired, since 
they are no longer required.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">t</span>
 (table of contents): Display a table of contents of the archive. By 
default, this lists just the names of the object files in the archive. 
By adding the <span class="docEmphasis">v</span> 
(verbose) modifier, we additionally see all of the other attributes 
recorded in the archive for each object file, as in the following 
example:</p><pre>$ <b>ar tv libdemo.a</b>
rw-r--r-- 1000/100 1001016 Nov 15 12:26 2009 mod1.o
rw-r--r-- 1000/100 406668 Nov 15 12:21 2009 mod2.o
rw-r--r-- 1000/100  46672 Nov 15 12:21 2009 mod3.o</pre><br/>
<p class="docList">The additional 
attributes that we see for each object are, from left to right, its 
permissions when it was added to the archive, its user ID and group ID, 
its size, and the date and time when it was last modified.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">d</span> (delete): Delete a named module from the archive, as in this example:</p><pre>$ <b>ar d libdemo.a mod3.o</b></pre><br/>
</li></ul><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EYUHK">41.2.1.2. Using a static library</h5><p class="docText">We
 can link a program against a static library in two ways. The first is 
to name the static library as part of the link command, as in the 
following:</p><pre>$ <b>cc -g -c prog.c</b>
$ <b>cc -g -o prog prog.o libdemo.a</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Alternatively, we can place the library in one of the standard directories searched by the linker (e.g., <tt>/usr/lib</tt>), and then specify the library name (i.e., the filename of the library without the <tt>lib</tt> prefix and <tt>.a</tt> suffix) using the <span class="docEmphasis">-l</span> option:</p><pre>$ <b>cc -g -o prog prog.o -ldemo</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If the library resides in a
 directory not normally searched by the linker, we can specify that the 
linker should search this additional directory using the <span class="docEmphasis">-L</span> option:</p><pre>$ <b>cc -g -o prog prog.o -L</b><b><tt><i>mylibdir</i></tt></b> <b>-ldemo</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Although a static library may contain many object modules, the linker includes only those modules that the program requires.</p><p class="docText">Having linked the program, we can run it in the usual way:</p><pre>$ <b>./prog</b>
Called mod1-x1
Called mod2-x2</pre><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
