<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>41.3. Overview of Shared Libraries</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">41.3. Overview of Shared Libraries</h3><p class="docText">When
 a program is built by linking against a static library (or, for that 
matter, without using a library at all), the resulting executable file 
includes copies of all of the object files that were linked into the 
program. Thus, when several different executables use the same object 
modules, each executable has its own copy of the object modules. This 
redundancy of code has several disadvantages:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Disk space is wasted storing multiple copies of the same object modules. Such wastage can be considerable.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If
 several different programs using the same modules are running at the 
same time, then each holds separate copies of the object modules in 
virtual memory, thus increasing the overall virtual memory demands on 
the system.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If a 
change is required (perhaps a security or bug fix) to an object module 
in a static library, then all executables using that module must be 
relinked in order to incorporate the change. This disadvantage is 
further compounded by the fact that the system administrator needs to be
 aware of which applications were linked against the library.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Shared
 libraries were designed to address these shortcomings. The key idea of a
 shared library is that a single copy of the object modules is shared by
 all programs requiring the modules. The object modules are not copied 
into the linked executable; instead, a single copy of the library is 
loaded into memory at run time, when the first program requiring modules
 from the shared library is started. When other programs using the same 
shared library are later executed, they use the copy of the library that
 is already loaded into memory. The use of shared libraries means that 
executable programs require less space on disk and (when running) in 
virtual memory.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Although
 the code of a shared library is shared among multiple processes, its 
variables are not. Each process that uses the library has its own copies
 of the global and static variables that are defined within the library.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Shared libraries provide the following further advantages:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Because
 overall program size is smaller, in some cases, programs can be loaded 
into memory and started more quickly. This point holds true only for 
large shared libraries that are already in use by another program. The 
first program to load a shared library will actually take longer to 
start, since the shared library must be found and loaded into memory.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Since
 object modules are not copied into the executable files, but instead 
maintained centrally in the shared library, it is possible (subject to 
limitations described in Section 41.8)
 to make changes to the object modules without requiring programs to be 
relinked in order to see the changes. Such changes can be carried out 
even while running programs are using an existing version of the shared 
library.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The principal costs of this added functionality are the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Shared
 libraries are more complex than static libraries, both at the 
conceptual level, and at the practical level of creating shared 
libraries and building the programs that use them.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Shared libraries must be compiled to use position-independent code (described in Section 41.4.2), which has a performance overhead on most architectures because it requires the use of an extra register ([Hubicka, 2003]).</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Symbol relocation</span>
 must be performed at run time. During symbol relocation, references to 
each symbol (a variable or function) in a shared library need to be 
modified to correspond to the actual run-time location at which the 
symbol is placed in virtual memory. Because of this relocation process, a
 program using a shared library may take a little more time to execute 
than its statically linked equivalent.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">One further use of shared libraries is as a building block in the <span class="docEmphasis">Java Native Interface</span>
 (JNI), which allows Java code to directly access features of the 
underlying operating system by calling C functions within a shared 
library. For further information, see [Liang, 1999] and [Rochkind, 
2004].</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
