<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>41.5. Useful Tools for Working with Shared Libraries</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">41.5. Useful Tools for Working with Shared Libraries</h3><p class="docText">In
 this section, we briefly describe a few tools that are useful for 
analyzing shared libraries, executable files, and compiled object (<tt>.o</tt>) files.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EQWHK">41.5.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EUWHK">41.5.1.1. The <span class="docEmphasis">ldd</span> command</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">ldd(1)</span>
 (list dynamic dependencies) command displays the shared libraries that a
 program (or a shared library) requires to run. Here’s an example:</p><pre>$ <b>ldd prog</b>
         libdemo.so.1 =&gt; /usr/lib/libdemo.so.1 (0x40019000)
         libc.so.6 =&gt; /lib/tls/libc.so.6 (0x4017b000)
         /lib/ld-linux.so.2 =&gt; /lib/ld-linux.so.2 (0x40000000)</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">ldd</span>
 command resolves each library reference (employing the same search 
conventions as the dynamic linker) and displays the results in the 
following form:</p><pre><span class="docEmphasis">library-name</span> =&gt; <span class="docEmphasis">resolves-to-path</span></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">For most ELF executables, <span class="docEmphasis">ldd</span> will list entries for at least <tt>ld-linux.so.2</tt>, the dynamic linker, and <tt>libc.so.6</tt>, the standard C library.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The name of the C library is different on some architectures. For example, this library is named <tt>libc.so.6.1</tt> on IA-64 and Alpha.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EIYHK">41.5.1.2. The <span class="docEmphasis">objdump</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">readelf</span> commands</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">objdump</span>
 command can be used to obtain various information—including 
disassembled binary machine code—from an executable file, compiled 
object, or shared library. It can also be used to display information 
from the headers of the various ELF sections of these files; in this 
usage, it resembles <span class="docEmphasis">readelf</span>, which displays similar information, but in a different format. Sources of further information about <span class="docEmphasis">objdump</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">readelf</span> are listed at the end of this chapter.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EB1HK">41.5.1.3. The <span class="docEmphasis">nm</span> command</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">nm</span>
 command lists the set of symbols defined within an object library or 
executable program. One use of this command is to find out which of 
several libraries defines a symbol. For example, to find out which 
library defines the <span class="docEmphasis">crypt()</span> function, we could do the following:</p><pre>$ <b>nm -A /usr/lib/lib*.so 2&gt; /dev/null | grep ' crypt$'</b>
/usr/lib/libcrypt.so:00007080 W crypt</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">-A</span> option to <span class="docEmphasis">nm</span>
 specifies that the library name should be listed at the start of each 
line displaying a symbol. This is necessary because, by default, <span class="docEmphasis">nm</span>
 lists the library name once, and then, on subsequent lines, all of the 
symbols it contains, which isn’t useful for the kind of filtering shown 
in the above example. In addition, we discard standard error output in 
order to hide error messages about files in formats unrecognized by <span class="docEmphasis">nm</span>. From the above output, we can see that <span class="docEmphasis">crypt()</span> is defined in the <span class="docEmphasis">libcrypt</span> library.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
