<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>41.7. Installing Shared Libraries</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">41.7. Installing Shared Libraries</h3><p class="docText">In the examples up to now, we created a shared library in a user-private directory, and then used the <tt>LD_LIBRARY_PATH</tt>
 environment variable to ensure that the dynamic linker searched that 
directory. Both privileged and unprivileged users may use this 
technique. However, this technique should not be employed in production 
applications. More usually, a shared library and its associated symbolic
 links are installed in one of a number of standard library directories,
 in particular, one of the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><tt>/usr/lib</tt>, the directory in which most standard libraries are installed;</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>/lib</tt>, the directory into which libraries required during system startup should be installed (since, during system startup, <tt>/usr/lib</tt> may not be mounted yet);</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>/usr/local/lib</tt>,
 the directory into which nonstandard or experimental libraries should 
be installed (placing libraries in this directory is also useful if <tt>/usr/lib</tt> is a network mount shared among multiple systems and we want to install a library just for use on this system); or</p></li><li><p class="docList">one of the directories listed in <tt>/etc/ld.so.conf</tt> (described shortly).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">In most cases, copying a file into one of these directories requires superuser privilege.</p><p class="docText">After
 installation, the symbolic links for the soname and linker name must be
 created, usually as relative symbolic links in the same directory as 
the library file. Thus, to install our demonstration library in <tt>/usr/lib</tt> (whose permissions only allow updates by <span class="docEmphasis">root</span>), we would do the following:</p><pre>$ <b>su</b>
Password:
# <b>mv libdemo.so.1.0.1 /usr/lib</b>
# <b>cd /usr/lib</b>
# <b>ln -s libdemo.so.1.0.1 libdemo.so.1</b>
# <b>ln -s libdemo.so.1 libdemo.so</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The last two lines in this shell session create the soname and linker name symbolic links.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJ2HK">41.7.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EN2HK">41.7.1.1. <span class="docEmphasis">ldconfig</span></h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">ldconfig(8)</span> program addresses two potential problems with shared libraries:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Shared
 libraries can reside in a variety of directories. If the dynamic linker
 needed to search all of these directories in order to find a library, 
then loading libraries could be very slow.</p></li><li><p class="docList">As new versions of libraries are installed or old versions are removed, the soname symbolic links may become out of date.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">ldconfig</span> program solves these problems by performing two tasks:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">It searches a standard set of directories and creates or updates a cache file, <tt>/etc/ld.so.cache</tt>,
 to contain a list of the (latest minor versions of each of the) major 
library versions in all of these directories. The dynamic linker in turn
 uses this cache file when resolving library names at run time. To build
 the cache, <span class="docEmphasis">ldconfig</span> searches the directories specified in the file <tt>/etc/ld.so.conf</tt> and then <tt>/lib</tt> and <tt>/usr/lib</tt>. The <tt>/etc/ld.so.conf</tt>
 file consists of a list of directory pathnames (these should be 
specified as absolute pathnames), separated by newlines, spaces, tabs, 
commas, or colons. In some distributions, the directory <tt>/usr/local/lib</tt> is included in this list. (If not, we may need to add it manually.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The command <span class="docEmphasis">ldconfig -p</span> displays the current contents of <tt>/etc/ld.so.cache</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">It
 examines the latest minor version (i.e., the version with the highest 
minor number) of each major version of each library to find the embedded
 soname and then creates (or updates) relative symbolic links for each 
soname in the same directory.</p></div></li></ol></div><p class="docText">In order to correctly perform these actions, <span class="docEmphasis">ldconfig</span>
 expects libraries to be named according to the conventions described 
earlier (i.e., library real names include major and minor identifiers 
that increase appropriately from one library version to the next).</p><p class="docText">By default, <span class="docEmphasis">ldconfig</span> performs both of the above actions. Command-line options can be used to selectively inhibit either action: the <span class="docEmphasis">-N</span> option prevents rebuilding of the cache, and the <span class="docEmphasis">-X</span> option inhibits the creation of the soname symbolic links. In addition, the <span class="docEmphasis">-v</span> (<span class="docEmphasis">verbose</span>) option causes <span class="docEmphasis">ldconfig</span> to display output describing its actions.</p><p class="docText">We should run <span class="docEmphasis">ldconfig</span> whenever a new library is installed, an existing library is updated or removed, or the list of directories in <tt>/etc/ld.so.conf</tt> is changed.</p><p class="docText">As an example of the operation of <span class="docEmphasis">ldconfig</span>, suppose we wanted to install two different major versions of a library. We would do this as follows:</p><pre>$ <b>su</b>
Password:
# <b>mv libdemo.so.1.0.1 libdemo.so.2.0.0 /usr/lib</b>
# <b>ldconfig -v | grep libdemo</b>
        libdemo.so.1 -&gt; libdemo.so.1.0.1 (changed)
        libdemo.so.2 -&gt; libdemo.so.2.0.0 (changed)</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Above, we filter the output of <span class="docEmphasis">ldconfig</span>, so that we see just the information relating to libraries named <tt>libdemo</tt>.</p><p class="docText">Next, we list the files named <tt>libdemo</tt> in <tt>/usr/lib</tt> to verify the setup of the soname symbolic links:</p><pre># <b>cd /usr/lib</b>
# <b>ls -l libdemo* | awk '{print $1, $9, $10, $11}'</b>
lrwxrwxrwx libdemo.so.1 -&gt; libdemo.so.1.0.1
-rwxr-xr-x libdemo.so.1.0.1
lrwxrwxrwx libdemo.so.2 -&gt; libdemo.so.2.0.0
-rwxr-xr-x libdemo.so.2.0.0</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We must still create the symbolic link for the linker name, as shown in the next command:</p><pre># <b>ln -s libdemo.so.2 libdemo.so</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">However, if we install a new 2.<span class="docEmphasis">x</span> minor version of our library, then, since the linker name points to the latest soname, <span class="docEmphasis">ldconfig</span> has the effect of also keeping the linker name up to date, as the following example shows:</p><pre># <b>mv libdemo.so.2.0.1 /usr/lib</b>
# <b>ldconfig -v | grep libdemo</b>
        libdemo.so.1 -&gt; libdemo.so.1.0.1
        libdemo.so.2 -&gt; libdemo.so.2.0.1 (changed)</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If we are building and using a
 private library (i.e., one that is not installed in one of the standard
 directories), we can have <span class="docEmphasis">ldconfig</span> create the soname symbolic link for us by using the <span class="docEmphasis">-n</span> option. This specifies that <span class="docEmphasis">ldconfig</span>
 should process only libraries in the directories on the command line 
and should not update the cache file. In the following example, we use <span class="docEmphasis">ldconfig</span> to process libraries in the current working directory:</p><pre>$ <b>gcc -g -c -fPIC -Wall mod1.c mod2.c mod3.c</b>
$ <b>gcc -g -shared -Wl,-soname,libdemo.so.1 -o libdemo.so.1.0.1 \</b>
<b>          mod1.o mod2.o mod3.o</b>
$ <b>/sbin/ldconfig -nv .</b>
.:
        libdemo.so.1 -&gt; libdemo.so.1.0.1
$ <b>ls -l libdemo.so* | awk '{print $1, $9, $10, $11}'</b>
lrwxrwxrwx libdemo.so.1 -&gt; libdemo.so.1.0.1
-rwxr-xr-x libdemo.so.1.0.1</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In the above example, we specified the full pathname when running <span class="docEmphasis">ldconfig</span>, because we were using an unprivileged account whose <tt>PATH</tt> environment variable did not include the <tt>/sbin</tt> directory.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
