<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>41.8. Compatible Versus Incompatible Libraries</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">41.8. Compatible Versus Incompatible Libraries</h3><p class="docText">Over
 time, we may need to make changes to the code of a shared library. Such
 changes result in a new version of the library that is either <span class="docEmphasis">compatible</span> with previous version(s), meaning that we need to change only the minor version identifier of the library’s real name, or <span class="docEmphasis">incompatible</span>, meaning that we must define a new major version of the library.</p><p class="docText">A change to a library is compatible with an existing library version if <span class="docEmphasis">all</span> of the following conditions hold true:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The
 semantics of each public function and variable in the library remain 
unchanged. In other words, each function keeps the same argument list, 
and continues to produce its specified effect on global variables and 
returned arguments, and returns the same result value. Thus, changes 
that result in an improvement in performance or fix a bug (resulting in 
closer conformance to specified behavior) can be regarded as compatible 
changes.</p></li><li><p class="docList">No function
 or variable in the library’s public API is removed. It is, however, 
compatible to add new functions and variables to the public API.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Structures
 allocated within and returned by each function remain unchanged. 
Similarly, public structures exported by the library remain unchanged. 
One exception to this rule is that, under certain circumstances, new 
items may be added to the end of an existing structure, though even this
 may be subject to pitfalls if, for example, the calling program tries 
to allocate arrays of this structure type. Library designers sometimes 
circumvent this limitation by defining exported structures to be larger 
than is required in the initial release of the library, with some extra 
padding fields being “reserved for future use.”</p></li></ul><p class="docText">If
 none of these conditions is violated, then the new library name can be 
updated by adjusting the minor version of the existing name. Otherwise, a
 new major version of the library should be created.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
