<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>41.11. Finding Shared Libraries at Run Time</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">41.11. Finding Shared Libraries at Run Time</h3><p class="docText">When resolving library dependencies, the dynamic linker first inspects each dependency string to see if it contains a slash (<tt>/</tt>),
 which can occur if we specified an explicit library pathname when 
linking the executable. If a slash is found, then the dependency string 
is interpreted as a pathname (either absolute or relative), and the 
library is loaded using that pathname. Otherwise, the dynamic linker 
searches for the shared library using the following rules:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If the executable has any directories listed in its <tt>DT_RPATH</tt> run-time library path list (<span class="docEmphasis">rpath</span>) and the executable does <span class="docEmphasis">not</span> contain a <tt>DT_RUNPATH</tt> list, then these directories are searched (in the order that they were supplied when linking the program).</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If the <tt>LD_LIBRARY_PATH</tt>
 environment variable is defined, then each of the colon-separated 
directories listed in its value is searched in turn. If the executable 
is a set-user-ID or set-group-ID program, then <tt>LD_LIBRARY_PATH</tt>
 is ignored. This is a security measure to prevent users from tricking 
the dynamic linker into loading a private version of a library with the 
same name as a library required by the executable.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If the executable has any directories listed in its <tt>DT_RUNPATH</tt>
 run-time library path list, then these directories are searched (in the
 order that they were supplied when linking the program).</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The file <tt>/etc/ld.so.cache</tt> is checked to see if it contains an entry for the library.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The directories <tt>/lib</tt> and <tt>/usr/lib</tt> are searched (in that order).</p></div></li></ol></div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
