<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>41.13. Using a Static Library Instead of a Shared Library</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">41.13. Using a Static Library Instead of a Shared Library</h3><p class="docText">Although
 it is almost always preferable to use shared libraries, there are 
occasional situations where static libraries may be appropriate. In 
particular, the fact that a statically linked application contains all 
of the code that it requires at run time can be advantageous. For 
example, static linking is useful if the user can’t, or doesn’t wish to,
 install a shared library on the system where the program is to be used,
 or if the program is to be run in an environment (perhaps a <span class="docEmphasis">chroot</span>
 jail, for example) where shared libraries are unavailable. In addition,
 even a compatible shared library upgrade may unintentionally introduce a
 bug that breaks an application. By linking an application statically, 
we can ensure that it is immune to changes in the shared libraries on a 
system and that it has all of the code it requires to run (at the 
expense of a larger program size, and consequent increased disk and 
memory requirements).</p><p class="docText">By default, where the linker has a choice of a shared and a static library of the same name (e.g., we link using <span class="docEmphasis">-Lsomedir -ldemo</span>, and both <tt>libdemo.so</tt> and <tt>libdemo.a</tt>
 exist), the shared version of the library is used. To force usage of 
the static version of the library, we may do one of the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Specify the pathname of the static library (including the <tt>.a</tt> extension) on the <span class="docEmphasis">gcc</span> command line.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Specify the <span class="docEmphasis">-static</span> option to <span class="docEmphasis">gcc</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Use the <span class="docEmphasis">gcc</span> options <span class="docEmphasis">-Wl,-Bstatic</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">-Wl,-Bdynamic</span> to explicitly toggle the linker’s choice between static and shared libraries. These options can be intermingled with <span class="docEmphasis">-l</span> options on the <span class="docEmphasis">gcc</span> command line. The linker processes the options in the order in which they are specified.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
