<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>41.14. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">41.14. Summary</h3><p class="docText">An
 object library is an aggregation of compiled object modules that can be
 employed by programs that are linked against the library. Like other 
UNIX implementations, Linux provides two types of object libraries: 
static libraries, which were the only type of library available under 
early UNIX systems, and the more modern shared libraries.</p><p class="docText">Because
 they provide several advantages over static libraries, shared libraries
 are the predominant type of library in use on contemporary UNIX 
systems. The advantages of shared libraries spring primarily from the 
fact that when a program is linked against the library, copies of the 
object modules required by the program are not included in the resulting
 executable. Instead, the (static) linker merely includes information in
 the executable file about the shared libraries that are required at run
 time. When the file is executed, the dynamic linker uses this 
information to load the required shared libraries. At run time, all 
programs using the same shared library share a single copy of that 
library in memory. Since shared libraries are not copied into executable
 files, and a single memory-resident copy of the shared library is 
employed by all programs at run time, shared libraries reduce the amount
 of disk space and memory required by the system.</p><p class="docText">The
 shared library soname provides a level of indirection in resolving 
shared library references at run time. If a shared library has a soname,
 then this name, rather than the library’s real name, is recorded in the
 resulting executable produced by the static linker. A versioning 
scheme, whereby a shared library is given a real name of the form <tt>lib</tt><span class="docEmphasis">name.so.major-id.minor-id</span>, while the soname has the form <tt>lib</tt><span class="docEmphasis">name.so.major-id</span>,
 allows for the creation of programs that automatically employ the 
latest minor version of the shared library (without requiring the 
programs to be relinked), while also allowing for the creation of new, 
incompatible major versions of the library.</p><p class="docText">In
 order to find a shared library at run time, the dynamic linker follows a
 standard set of search rules, which include searching a set of 
directories (e.g., /<tt>lib</tt> and /<tt>usr/lib</tt>) in which most shared libraries are installed.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E45HK">41.14.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EB6HK">41.14.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">Various information related to static and shared libraries can be found in the <span class="docEmphasis">ar(1)</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">gcc(1)</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ld(1)</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ldconfig(8)</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ld.so(8)</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen(3)</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">objdump(1)</span> manual pages and in the <span class="docEmphasis">info</span> documentation for <span class="docEmphasis">ld</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">readelf</span>.
 [Drepper, 2004 (b)] covers many of the finer details of writing shared 
libraries on Linux. Further useful information can also be found in 
David Wheeler’s <span class="docEmphasis">Program Library HOWTO</span>, which is online at the LDP web site, http://www.tldp.org/. The GNU shared library scheme has many similarities to that implemented in Solaris, and therefore it is worth reading Sun’s <span class="docEmphasis">Linker and Libraries Guide</span> (available at http://docs.sun.com/) for further information and examples. [Levine, 2000] provides an introduction to the operation of static and dynamic linkers.</p><p class="docText">Information about GNU <span class="docEmphasis">Libtool</span>,
 a tool that shields the programmer from the implementation-specific 
details of building shared libraries, can be found online at http://www.gnu.org/software/libtool and in [Vaughan et al., 2000].</p><p class="docText">The document <span class="docEmphasis">Executable and Linking Format</span>, from the <span class="docEmphasis">Tools Interface Standards</span> committee, provides details on ELF. This document can be found online at http://refspecs.freestandards.org/elf/elf.pdf. [Lu, 1995] also provides a lot of useful detail on ELF.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
