<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>42.1. Dynamically Loaded Libraries</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">42.1. Dynamically Loaded Libraries</h3><p class="docText">When
 an executable starts, the dynamic linker loads all of the shared 
libraries in the program’s dynamic dependency list. Sometimes, however, 
it can be useful to load libraries at a later time. For example, a 
plug-in is loaded only when it is needed. This functionality is provided
 by an API to the dynamic linker. This API, usually referred to as the <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen</span> API, originated on Solaris, and much of it is now specified in SUSv3.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen</span>
 API enables a program to open a shared library at run time, search for a
 function by name in that library, and then call the function. A shared 
library loaded at run time in this way is commonly referred to as a <span class="docEmphasis">dynamically loaded library</span>, and is created in the same way as any other shared library.</p><p class="docText">The core <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen</span> API consists of the following functions (all of which are specified in SUSv3):</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span> function opens a shared library, returning a handle used by subsequent calls.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">dlsym()</span> function searches a library for a symbol (a string containing the name of a function or variable) and returns its address.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">dlclose()</span> function closes a library previously opened by <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">dlerror()</span> function returns an error-message string, and is used after a failure return from one of the preceding functions.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> implementation also includes a number of related functions, some of which we describe below.</p><p class="docText">To build programs that use the <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen</span> API on Linux, we must specify the <span class="docEmphasis">-ldl</span> option, in order to link against the <span class="docEmphasis">libdl</span> library.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWCAM">42.1.1. Opening a Shared Library: <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span></h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span> function loads the shared library named in <span class="docEmphasis">libfilename</span> into the calling process’s virtual address space and increments the count of open references to the library.</p><pre>#include &lt;dlfcn.h&gt;

void *<b>dlopen</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">libfilename</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns library handle on success, or <tt>NULL</tt> on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If <span class="docEmphasis">libfilename</span> contains a slash (<tt>/</tt>), <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span>
 interprets it as an absolute or relative pathname. Otherwise, the 
dynamic linker searches for the shared library using the rules described
 in Section 41.11.</p><p class="docText">On success, <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span> returns a handle that can be used to refer to the library in subsequent calls to functions in the <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen</span> API. If an error occurred (e.g., the library couldn’t be found), <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span> returns <tt>NULL</tt>.</p><p class="docText">If the shared library specified by <span class="docEmphasis">libfilename</span> contains dependencies on other shared libraries, <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span>
 also automatically loads those libraries. This procedure occurs 
recursively if necessary. We refer to the set of such loaded libraries 
as this library’s <span class="docEmphasis">dependency tree</span>.</p><p class="docText">It is possible to call <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span>
 multiple times on the same library file. The library is loaded into 
memory only once (by the initial call), and all calls return the same <span class="docEmphasis">handle</span> value. However, the <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen</span> API maintains a reference count for each library handle. This count is incremented by each call to <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span> and decremented by each call to <span class="docEmphasis">dlclose()</span>; only when the count reaches 0 does <span class="docEmphasis">dlclose()</span> unload the library from memory.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> argument is a bit mask that must include exactly one of the constants <tt>RTLD_LAZY</tt> or <tt>RTLD_NOW</tt>, with the following meanings:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">RTLD_LAZY</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Undefined
 function symbols in the library should be resolved only as the code is 
executed. If a piece of code requiring a particular symbol is not 
executed, that symbol is never resolved. Lazy resolution is performed 
only for function references; references to variables are always 
resolved immediately. Specifying the <tt>RTLD_LAZY</tt>
 flag provides behavior that corresponds to the normal operation of the 
dynamic linker when loading the shared libraries identified in an 
executable’s dynamic dependency list.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">RTLD_NOW</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">All undefined symbols in the library should be immediately resolved before <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span>
 completes, regardless of whether they will ever be required. As a 
consequence, opening the library is slower, but any potential undefined 
function symbol errors are detected immediately instead of at some later
 time. This can be useful when debugging an application, or simply to 
ensure that an application fails immediately on an unresolved symbol, 
rather than doing so only after executing for a long time.</p></dd></dl><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">By setting the environment variable <tt>LD_BIND_NOW</tt> to a nonempty string, we can force the dynamic linker to immediately resolve all symbols (i.e., like <tt>RTLD_NOW</tt>)
 when loading the shared libraries identified in an executable’s dynamic
 dependency list. This environment variable is effective in <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> 2.1.1 and later. Setting <tt>LD_BIND_NOW</tt> overrides the effect of the <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span> <tt>RTLD_LAZY</tt> flag.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">It is also possible to include further values in <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>. The following flags are specified in SUSv3:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">RTLD_GLOBAL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Symbols
 in this library and its dependency tree are made available for 
resolving references in other libraries loaded by this process and also 
for lookups via <span class="docEmphasis">dlsym()</span>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">RTLD_LOCAL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is the converse of <tt>RTLD_GLOBAL</tt>
 and the default if neither constant is specified. It specifies that 
symbols in this library and its dependency tree are not available to 
resolve references in subsequently loaded libraries.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">SUSv3 doesn’t specify a default if neither <tt>RTLD_GLOBAL</tt> nor <tt>RTLD_LOCAL</tt> is specified. Most UNIX implementations assume the same default (<tt>RTLD_LOCAL</tt>) as Linux, but a few assume a default of <tt>RTLD_GLOBAL</tt>.</p><p class="docText">Linux also supports a number of flags that are not specified in SUSv3:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">RTLD_NODELETE</span></span> (since <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> 2.2)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Don’t unload the library during a <span class="docEmphasis">dlclose()</span>,
 even if the reference count falls to 0. This means that the library’s 
static variables are not reinitialized if the library is later reloaded 
by <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span>. (We can achieve a similar effect for libraries loaded automatically by the dynamic linker by specifying the <span class="docEmphasis">gcc -Wl,-znodelete</span> option when creating the library.)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">RTLD_NOLOAD</span></span> (since <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> 2.2)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Don’t
 load the library. This serves two purposes. First, we can use this flag
 to check if a particular library is currently loaded as part of the 
process’s address space. If it is, <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span> returns the library’s handle; if it is not, <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span> returns <tt>NULL</tt>. Second, we can use this flag to “promote” the <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> of an already loaded library. For example, we can specify <tt>RTLD_NOLOAD | RTLD_GLOBAL</tt> in <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> when using <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span> on a library previously opened with <tt>RTLD_LOCAL</tt>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">RTLD_DEEPBIND</span></span> (since <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> 2.3.4)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">When
 resolving symbol references made by this library, search for 
definitions in the library before searching for definitions in libraries
 that have already been loaded. This allows a library to be 
self-contained, using its own symbol definitions in preference to global
 symbols with the same name defined in other shared libraries that have 
already been loaded. (This is similar to the effect of the <span class="docEmphasis">-Bsymbolic</span> linker option described in Section 41.12.)</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">The <tt>RTLD_NODELETE</tt> and <tt>RTLD_NOLOAD</tt> flags are also implemented in the Solaris <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen</span> API, but are available on few other UNIX implementations. The <tt>RTLD_DEEPBIND</tt> flag is Linux-specific.</p><p class="docText">As a special case, we can specify <span class="docEmphasis">libfilename</span> as <tt>NULL</tt>. This causes <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span>
 to return a handle for the main program. (SUSv3 refers to this as a 
handle for the “global symbol object.”) Specifying this handle in a 
subsequent call to <span class="docEmphasis">dlsym()</span>
 causes the requested symbol to be sought in the main program, followed 
by all shared libraries loaded at program startup, and then all 
libraries dynamically loaded with the <tt>RTLD_GLOBAL</tt> flag.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EYMAM">42.1.2. Diagnosing Errors: <span class="docEmphasis">dlerror()</span></h4><p class="docText">If we receive an error return from <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span> or one of the other functions in the <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen</span> API, we can use <span class="docEmphasis">dlerror()</span> to obtain a pointer to a string that indicates the cause of the error.</p><pre>#include &lt;dlfcn.h&gt;

const char *<span class="docEmphasis">dlerror</span>(void);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns pointer to error-diagnostic string, or <tt>NULL</tt> if no error has occurred since previous call to <span class="docEmphasis">dlerror()</span></p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">dlerror()</span> function returns <tt>NULL</tt> if no error has occurred since the last call to <span class="docEmphasis">dlerror()</span>. We’ll see how this is useful in the next section.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6OAM">42.1.3. Obtaining the Address of a Symbol: <span class="docEmphasis">dlsym()</span></h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">dlsym()</span> function searches for the named <span class="docEmphasis">symbol</span> (a function or variable) in the library referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">handle</span> and in the libraries in that library’s dependency tree.</p><pre>#include &lt;dlfcn.h&gt;

void *<b>dlsym</b>(void *<span class="docEmphasis">handle</span>, char *<span class="docEmphasis">symbol</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns address of <span class="docEmphasis">symbol</span>, or <tt>NULL</tt> if <span class="docEmphasis">symbol</span> is not found</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If <span class="docEmphasis">symbol</span> is found, <span class="docEmphasis">dlsym()</span> returns its address; otherwise, <span class="docEmphasis">dlsym()</span> returns <tt>NULL</tt>. The <span class="docEmphasis">handle</span> argument is normally a library handle returned by a previous call to <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span>. Alternatively, it may be one of the so-called pseudohandles described below.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">A related function, <span class="docEmphasis">dlvsym(handle, symbol, version)</span>, is similar to <span class="docEmphasis">dlsym()</span>, but can be used to search a symbol-versioned library for a symbol definition whose version matches the string specified in <span class="docEmphasis">version</span>. (We describe symbol versioning in Section 42.3.2.) The <tt>_GNU_SOURCE</tt> feature test macro must be defined in order to obtain the declaration of this function from <tt>&lt;dlfcn.h&gt;</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The value of a symbol returned by <span class="docEmphasis">dlsym()</span> may be <tt>NULL</tt>, which is indistinguishable from the “symbol not found” return. In order to differentiate the two possibilities, we must call <span class="docEmphasis">dlerror()</span> beforehand (to make sure that any previously held error string is cleared) and then if, after the call to <span class="docEmphasis">dlsym()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">dlerror()</span> returns a non-<tt>NULL</tt> value, we know that an error occurred.</p><p class="docText">If <span class="docEmphasis">symbol</span> is the name of a variable, then we can assign the return value of <span class="docEmphasis">dlsym()</span> to an appropriate pointer type, and obtain the value of the variable by dereferencing the pointer:</p><pre>int *ip;

ip = (int *) dlsym(symbol, "myvar");
if (ip != NULL)
    printf("Value is %d\n", *ip);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If <span class="docEmphasis">symbol</span> is the name of a function, then the pointer returned by <span class="docEmphasis">dlsym()</span> can be used to call the function. We can store the value returned by <span class="docEmphasis">dlsym()</span> in a pointer of the appropriate type, such as the following:</p><pre>int (*funcp)(int);              /* Pointer to a function taking an integer
                                   argument and returning an integer */</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">However, we can’t simply assign the result of <span class="docEmphasis">dlsym()</span> to such a pointer, as in the following example:</p><pre>funcp = dlsym(handle, symbol);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The reason is that the C99 standard forbids assignment between a function pointer and <span class="docEmphasis">void *</span>. The solution is to use the following (somewhat clumsy) cast:</p><pre>*(void **) (&amp;funcp) = dlsym(handle, symbol);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Having used <span class="docEmphasis">dlsym()</span>
 to obtain a pointer to the function, we can then call the function 
using the usual C syntax for dereferencing function pointers:</p><pre>res = (*funcp)(somearg);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Instead of the <span class="docEmphasis">*(void **)</span> syntax shown above, one might consider using the following seemingly equivalent code when assigning the return value of <span class="docEmphasis">dlsym()</span>:</p><pre>(void *) funcp = dlsym(handle, symbol);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">However, for this code, <span class="docEmphasis">gcc -pedantic</span> warns that “ANSI C forbids the use of cast expressions as lvalues.” The <span class="docEmphasis">*(void **)</span> syntax doesn’t incur this warning because we are assigning to an address <span class="docEmphasis">pointed to</span> by the assignment’s lvalue.</p><p class="docText">On many UNIX implementations, we can use casts such as the following to eliminate warnings from the C compiler:</p><pre>funcp = (int (*) (int)) dlsym(handle, symbol);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">However, the specification of <span class="docEmphasis">dlsym()</span> in SUSv3 <span class="docEmphasis">Technical Corrigendum Number 1</span> notes that the C99 standard nevertheless requires compilers to generate a warning for such a conversion, and proposes the <span class="docEmphasis">*(void **)</span> syntax shown above.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">SUSv3 TC1 noted that because of the need for the <span class="docEmphasis">*(void **)</span> syntax, a future version of the standard may define separate <span class="docEmphasis">dlsym()</span>-like APIs for handling data and function pointers. However, SUSv4 contains no changes with respect to this point.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EZUAM">42.1.3.1. Using library pseudohandles with <span class="docEmphasis">dlsym()</span></h5><p class="docText">Instead of specifying a library handle returned by a call to <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span>, either of the following <span class="docEmphasis">pseudohandles</span> may be specified as the <span class="docEmphasis">handle</span> argument for <span class="docEmphasis">dlsym()</span>:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">RTLD_DEFAULT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Search for <span class="docEmphasis">symbol</span>
 starting with the main program, and then proceeding in order through 
the list of all shared libraries loaded, including those libraries 
dynamically loaded by <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span> with the <tt>RTLD_GLOBAL</tt> flag. This corresponds to the default search model employed by the dynamic linker.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">RTLD_NEXT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Search for <span class="docEmphasis">symbol</span> in shared libraries loaded after the one invoking <span class="docEmphasis">dlsym()</span>.
 This is useful when creating a wrapper function with the same name as a
 function defined elsewhere. For example, in our main program, we may 
define our own version of <span class="docEmphasis">malloc()</span> (which perhaps does some bookkeeping of memory allocation), and this function can invoke the real <span class="docEmphasis">malloc()</span> by first obtaining its address via the call <span class="docEmphasis">func = dlsym(RTLD_NEXT, “malloc”)</span>.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">The
 pseudohandle values listed above are not required by SUSv3 (which 
nevertheless reserves them for future use), and are not available on all
 UNIX implementations. In order to get the definitions of these 
constants from <tt>&lt;dlfcn.h&gt;</tt>, we must define the <tt>_GNU_SOURCE</tt> feature test macro.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EGXAM">42.1.3.2. Example program</h5><p class="docText">Example 42-1 demonstrates the use of the <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen</span>
 API. This program takes two command-line arguments: the name of a 
shared library to load and the name of a function to execute within that
 library. The following examples demonstrate the use of this program:</p><pre>$ <b>./dynload ./libdemo.so.1 x1</b>
Called mod1-x1
$ <b>LD_LIBRARY_PATH=. ./dynload libdemo.so.1 x1</b>
Called mod1-x1</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In the first of the above commands, <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span>
 notes that the library path includes a slash and thus interprets it as a
 relative pathname (in this case, to a library in the current working 
directory). In the second command, we specify a library search path in <tt>LD_LIBRARY_PATH</tt>.
 This search path is interpreted according to the usual rules of the 
dynamic linker (in this case, likewise to find the library in the 
current working directory).</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ECYAM">Example 42-1. Using the <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen</span> API</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>shlibs/dynload.c</b>
#include &lt;dlfcn.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    void *libHandle;            /* Handle for shared library */
    void (*funcp)(void);        /* Pointer to function with no arguments */
    const char *err;

    if (argc != 3 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s lib-path func-name\n", argv[0]);

    /* Load the shared library and get a handle for later use */

    libHandle = dlopen(argv[1], RTLD_LAZY);
    if (libHandle == NULL)
        fatal("dlopen: %s", dlerror());

    /* Search library for symbol named in argv[2] */

    (void) dlerror();                           /* Clear dlerror() */
    *(void **) (&amp;funcp) = dlsym(libHandle, argv[2]);
    err = dlerror();
    if (err != NULL)
        fatal("dlsym: %s", err);

    /* If the address returned by dlsym() is non-NULL, try calling it
       as a function that takes no arguments */

    if (funcp == NULL)
        printf("%s is NULL\n", argv[2]);
    else
        (*funcp)();

    dlclose(libHandle);                         /* Close the library */

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}

      <b>shlibs/dynload.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EQYAM">42.1.4. Closing a Shared Library: <span class="docEmphasis">dlclose()</span></h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">dlclose()</span> function closes a library.</p><pre>#include &lt;dlfcn.h&gt;

int <b>dlclose</b>(void *<span class="docEmphasis">handle</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">dlclose()</span> function decrements the system’s counter of open references to the library referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">handle</span>.
 If this reference count falls to 0, and no symbols in the library are 
required by other libraries, then the library is unloaded. This 
procedure is also (recursively) performed for the libraries in this 
library’s dependency tree. An implicit <span class="docEmphasis">dlclose()</span> of all libraries is performed on process termination.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">From <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> 2.2.3 onward, a function within a shared library can use <span class="docEmphasis">atexit()</span> (or <span class="docEmphasis">on_exit()</span>) to establish a function that is called automatically when the library is unloaded.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJ1AM">42.1.5. Obtaining Information About Loaded Symbols: <span class="docEmphasis">dladdr()</span></h4><p class="docText">Given an address in <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> (typically, one obtained by an earlier call to <span class="docEmphasis">dlsym()</span>), <span class="docEmphasis">dladdr()</span> returns a structure containing information about that address.</p><pre>#define _GNU_SOURCE
#include &lt;dlfcn.h&gt;

int <b>dladdr</b>(const void *<span class="docEmphasis">addr</span>, Dl_info *<span class="docEmphasis">info</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns nonzero value if <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> was found in a shared library, otherwise 0</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">info</span> argument is a pointer to a caller-allocated structure that has the following form:</p><pre>typedef struct {
    const char *dli_fname;          /* Pathname of shared library
                                       containing 'addr' */
    void       *dli_fbase;          /* Base address at which shared
                                       library is loaded */
    const char *dli_sname;          /* Name of nearest run-time symbol
                                       with an address &lt;= 'addr' */
    void       *dli_saddr;          /* Actual value of the symbol
                                       returned in 'dli_sname' */
} Dl_info;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The first two fields of the <span class="docEmphasis">Dl_info</span> structure specify the pathname and run-time base address of the shared library containing the address specified in <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span>. The last two fields return information about that address. Assuming that <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> points to the exact address of a symbol in the shared library, then <span class="docEmphasis">dli_saddr</span> returns the same value as was passed in <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span>.</p><p class="docText">SUSv3 doesn’t specify <span class="docEmphasis">dladdr()</span>, and this function is not available on all UNIX implementations.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EB4AM">42.1.6. Accessing Symbols in the Main Program</h4><p class="docText">Suppose that we use <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span> to dynamically load a shared library, use <span class="docEmphasis">dlsym()</span> to obtain the address of a function <span class="docEmphasis">x()</span> from that library, and then call <span class="docEmphasis">x()</span>. If <span class="docEmphasis">x()</span> in turn calls a function <span class="docEmphasis">y()</span>, then <span class="docEmphasis">y()</span> would normally be sought in one of the shared libraries loaded by the program.</p><p class="docText">Sometimes, it is desirable instead to have <span class="docEmphasis">x()</span> invoke an implementation of <span class="docEmphasis">y()</span>
 in the main program. (This is similar to a callback mechanism.) In 
order to do this, we must make the (global-scope) symbols in the main 
program available to the dynamic linker, by linking the program using 
the <span class="docEmphasis">--export-dynamic</span> linker option:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>gcc -Wl,--export-dynamic main.c </b>     <i> (plus further options and arguments)</i>

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Equivalently, we can write the following:</p><pre>$ <b>gcc -export-dynamic main.c</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Using either of these options allows a dynamically loaded library to access global symbols in the main program.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">gcc -rdynamic</span> option and the <span class="docEmphasis">gcc -Wl,-E</span> option are further synonyms for <span class="docEmphasis">-Wl,--export-dynamic</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
