<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>42.2. Controlling Symbol Visibility</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">42.2. Controlling Symbol Visibility</h3><p class="docText">A
 well-designed shared library should make visible only those symbols 
(functions and variables) that form part of its specified application 
binary interface (ABI). The reasons for this are as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">If
 the shared library designer accidentally exports unspecified 
interfaces, then authors of applications that use the library may choose
 to employ these interfaces. This creates a compatibility problem for 
future upgrades of the shared library. The library developer expects to 
be able to change or remove any interfaces other than those in the 
documented ABI, while the library user expects to continue using the 
same interfaces (with the same semantics) that they currently employ.</p></li><li><p class="docList">During
 run-time symbol resolution, any symbols that are exported by a shared 
library might interpose definitions that are provided in other shared 
libraries (Section 41.12).</p></li><li><p class="docList">Exporting unnecessary symbols increases the size of the dynamic symbol table that must be loaded at run time.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">All
 of these problems can be minimized or avoided altogether if the library
 designer ensures that only the symbols required by the library’s 
specified ABI are exported. The following techniques can be used to 
control the export of symbols:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">In a C program, we can use the <tt>static</tt> keyword to make a symbol private to a source-code module, thus rendering it unavailable for binding by other object files.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">As well as making a symbol private to a source-code module, the <tt>static</tt> keyword also has a converse effect. If a symbol is marked as <tt>static</tt>,
 then all references to the symbol in the same source file will be bound
 to that definition of the symbol. Consequently, these references won’t 
be subject to run-time interposition by definitions from other shared 
libraries (in the manner described in Section 41.12). This effect of the <tt>static</tt> keyword is similar to the <span class="docEmphasis">-Bsymbolic</span> linker option described in Section 41.12, with the difference that the <tt>static</tt> keyword affects a single symbol within a single source file.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><ul><li><p class="docList">The GNU C complier, <span class="docEmphasis">gcc</span>, provides a compiler-specific attribute declaration that performs a similar task to the <tt>static</tt> keyword:</p><pre>void
__attribute__ ((visibility("hidden")))
func(void) {
    /* Code */
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docList">Whereas the <tt>static</tt> keyword limits the visibility of a symbol to a single source code file, the <tt>hidden</tt>
 attribute makes the symbol available across all source code files that 
compose the shared library, but prevents it from being visible outside 
the library.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">As with the <tt>static</tt> keyword, the <tt>hidden</tt> attribute also has the converse effect of preventing symbol interposition at run time.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li><li><p class="docList">Version scripts (Section 42.3) can be used to precisely control symbol visibility and to select the version of a symbol to which a reference is bound.</p></li><li><p class="docList">When dynamically loading a shared library (Section 42.1.1), the <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span> <tt>RTLD_GLOBAL</tt>
 flag can be used to specify that the symbols defined by the library 
should be made available for binding by subsequently loaded libraries, 
and the <span class="docEmphasis">—export-dynamic</span> linker option (Section 42.1.6) can be used to make the global symbols of the main program available to dynamically loaded libraries.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">For further details on the topic of symbol visibility, see [Drepper, 2004 (b)].</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
