<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>42.3. Linker Version Scripts</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">42.3. Linker Version Scripts</h3><p class="docText">A <span class="docEmphasis">version script</span> is a text file containing instructions for the linker, <span class="docEmphasis">ld</span>. In order to use a version script, we must specify the <span class="docEmphasis">—version-script</span> linker option:</p><pre>$ <b>gcc -Wl,--version-script,</b><b><tt><i>myscriptfile.map</i></tt></b> <b>...</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Version scripts are commonly (but not universally) identified using the extension <tt>.map</tt>.</p><p class="docText">The following sections describe some uses of version scripts.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E2FAM">42.3.1. Controlling Symbol Visibility with Version Scripts</h4><p class="docText">One
 use of version scripts is to control the visibility of symbols that 
might otherwise accidentally be made global (i.e., visible to 
applications linking against the library). As a simple example, suppose 
that we are building a shared library from the three source files <tt>vis_comm.c</tt>, <tt>vis_f1.c</tt>, and <tt>vis_f2.c</tt>, which respectively define the functions <span class="docEmphasis">vis_comm()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">vis_f1()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">vis_f2()</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">vis_comm()</span> function is called by <span class="docEmphasis">vis_f1()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">vis_f2()</span>,
 but is not intended for direct use by applications linked against the 
library. Suppose we build the shared library in the usual way:</p><pre>$ <b>gcc -g -c -fPIC -Wall vis_comm.c vis_f1.c vis_f2.c</b>
$ <b>gcc -g -shared -o vis.so vis_comm.o vis_f1.o vis_f2.o</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If we use the following <span class="docEmphasis">readelf</span> command to list the dynamic symbols exported by the library, we see the following:</p><pre>$ <b>readelf --syms --use-dynamic vis.so | grep vis_</b>
   30  12: 00000790    59    FUNC GLOBAL DEFAULT  10 vis_f1
   25  13: 000007d0    73    FUNC GLOBAL DEFAULT  10 vis_f2
   27  16: 00000770    20    FUNC GLOBAL DEFAULT  10 vis_comm</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This shared library exported three symbols: <span class="docEmphasis">vis_comm()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">vis_f1()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">vis_f2()</span>. However, we would like to ensure that only the symbols <span class="docEmphasis">vis_f1()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">vis_f2()</span> are exported by the library. We can achieve this result using the following version script:</p><pre>$ <b>cat vis.map</b>
VER_1 {
    global:
        vis_f1;
        vis_f2;
    local:
        *;
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The identifier <span class="docEmphasis">VER_1</span> is an example of a <span class="docEmphasis">version tag</span>. As we’ll see in the discussion of symbol versioning in Section 42.3.2, a version script may contain multiple <span class="docEmphasis">version nodes</span>, each grouped within braces (<tt>{}</tt>)
 and prefixed with a unique version tag. If we are using a version 
script only for the purpose of controlling symbol visibility, then the 
version tag is redundant; nevertheless, older versions of <span class="docEmphasis">ld</span> required it. Modern versions of <span class="docEmphasis">ld</span>
 allow the version tag to be omitted; in this case, the version node is 
said to have an anonymous version tag, and no other version nodes may be
 present in the script.</p><p class="docText">Within the version node, the <tt>global</tt>
 keyword begins a semicolon-separated list of symbols that are made 
visible outside the library. The local keyword begins a list of symbols 
that are to be hidden from the outside world. The asterisk (*) here 
illustrates the fact that we can use wildcard patterns in these symbol 
specifications. The wildcard characters are the same as those used for 
shell filename matching—for example, <tt>*</tt> and <tt>?</tt>. (See the <span class="docEmphasis">glob(7)</span> manual page for further details.) In this example, using an asterisk for the <tt>local</tt> specification says that everything that wasn’t explicitly declared <tt>global</tt> is hidden. If we did not say this, then <span class="docEmphasis">vis_comm()</span> would still be visible, since the default is to make C global symbols visible outside the shared library.</p><p class="docText">We can then build our shared library using the version script as follows:</p><pre>$ <b>gcc -g -c -fPIC -Wall vis_comm.c vis_f1.c vis_f2.c</b>
$ <b>gcc -g -shared -o vis.so vis_comm.o vis_f1.o vis_f2.o \</b>
        <b>-Wl,--version-script,vis.map</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Using <span class="docEmphasis">readelf</span> once more shows that <span class="docEmphasis">vis_comm()</span> is no longer externally visible:</p><pre>$ <b>readelf --syms --use-dynamic vis.so | grep vis_</b>
   25   0: 00000730    73    FUNC GLOBAL DEFAULT  11 vis_f2
   29  16: 000006f0    59    FUNC GLOBAL DEFAULT  11 vis_f1</pre><br/>
<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6JAM">42.3.2. Symbol Versioning</h4><p class="docText">Symbol
 versioning allows a single shared library to provide multiple versions 
of the same function. Each program uses the version of the function that
 was current when the program was (statically) linked against the shared
 library. As a result, we can make an incompatible change to a shared 
library without needing to increase the library’s major version number. 
Carried to an extreme, symbol versioning can replace the traditional 
shared library major and minor versioning scheme. Symbol versioning is 
used in this manner in <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> 2.1 and later, so that all versions of <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> from 2.0 onward are supported within a single major library version (<tt>libc.so.6</tt>).</p><p class="docText">We
 demonstrate the use of symbol versioning with a simple example. We 
begin by creating the first version of a shared library using a version 
script:</p><pre>$ <b>cat sv_lib_v1.c</b>
#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;

void xyz(void) { printf("v1 xyz\n"); }
$ <b>cat sv_v1.map</b>
VER_1 {
        global: xyz;
        local:  *;      # Hide all other symbols
};
$ <b>gcc -g -c -fPIC -Wall sv_lib_v1.c</b>
$ <b>gcc -g -shared -o libsv.so sv_lib_v1.o -Wl,--version-script,sv_v1.map</b></pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Within a version script, the hash character (<tt>#</tt>) starts a comment.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">(To keep the example simple, we avoid the use of explicit library sonames and library major version numbers.)</p><p class="docText">At this stage, our version script, <tt>sv_v1.map</tt>, serves only to control the visibility of the shared library’s symbols; <span class="docEmphasis">xyz()</span> is exported, but all other symbols (of which there are none in this small example) are hidden. Next, we create a program, <span class="docEmphasis">p1</span>, which makes use of this library:</p><pre>$ <b>cat sv_prog.c</b>
#include &lt;stdlib.h&gt;

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    void xyz(void);

    xyz();

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
$ <b>gcc -g -o p1 sv_prog.c libsv.so</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">When we run this program, we see the expected result:</p><pre>$ <b>LD_LIBRARY_PATH=. ./p1</b>
v1 xyz</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Now, suppose that we want to modify the definition of <span class="docEmphasis">xyz()</span> within our library, while still ensuring that program <span class="docEmphasis">p1</span> continues to use the old version of this function. To do this, we must define two versions of <span class="docEmphasis">xyz()</span> within our library:</p><pre>$ <b>cat sv_lib_v2.c</b>
#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;

__asm__(".symver xyz_old,xyz@VER_1");
__asm__(".symver xyz_new,xyz@@VER_2");

void xyz_old(void) { printf("v1 xyz\n"); }

void xyz_new(void) { printf("v2 xyz\n"); }

void pqr(void) { printf("v2 pqr\n"); }</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Our two versions of <span class="docEmphasis">xyz()</span> are provided by the functions <span class="docEmphasis">xyz_old()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">xyz_new()</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">xyz_old()</span> function corresponds to our original definition of <span class="docEmphasis">xyz()</span>, which is the one that should continue to be used by program <span class="docEmphasis">p1</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">xyz_new()</span> function provides the definition of <span class="docEmphasis">xyz()</span> to be used by programs linking against the new version of the library.</p><p class="docText">The two <tt>.symver</tt>
 assembler directives are the glue that ties these two functions to 
different version tags in the modified version script (shown in a 
moment) that we use to create the new version of the shared library. The
 first of these directives says that <span class="docEmphasis">xyz_old()</span> is the implementation of <span class="docEmphasis">xyz()</span> to be used for applications linked against version tag <span class="docEmphasis">VER_1</span> (i.e., program <span class="docEmphasis">p1</span> in our example), and that <span class="docEmphasis">xyz_new()</span> is the implementation of <span class="docEmphasis">xyz()</span> to be used by applications linked against version tag <span class="docEmphasis">VER_2</span>.</p><p class="docText">The use of <tt>@@</tt> rather than <tt>@</tt> in the second <tt>.symver</tt> directive indicates that this is the default definition of <span class="docEmphasis">xyz()</span> to which applications should bind when statically linked against this shared library. Exactly one of the <tt>.symver</tt> directives for a symbol should be marked using <tt>@@</tt>.</p><p class="docText">The corresponding version script for our modified library is as follows:</p><pre>$ <b>cat sv_v2.map</b>
VER_1 {
        global: xyz;
        local:  *;      # Hide all other symbols
};

VER_2 {
        global: pqr;
} VER_1;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This version script provides a new version tag, <span class="docEmphasis">VER_2</span>, which depends on the tag <span class="docEmphasis">VER_1</span>. This dependency is indicated by the following line:</p><pre>} VER_1;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Version tag 
dependencies indicate the relationships between successive library 
versions. Semantically, the only effect of version tag dependencies on 
Linux is that a version node inherits <tt>global</tt> and <tt>local</tt> specifications from the version node upon which it depends.</p><p class="docText">Dependencies can be chained, so that we could have another version node tagged <span class="docEmphasis">VER_3</span>, which depended on <span class="docEmphasis">VER_2</span>, and so on.</p><p class="docText">The
 version tag names have no meanings in themselves. Their relationship 
with one another is determined only by the specified version 
dependencies, and we chose the names <span class="docEmphasis">VER_1</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">VER_2</span>
 merely to be suggestive of these relationships. To assist maintenance, 
recommended practice is to use version tags that include the package 
name and a version number. For example, <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> uses version tags with names such as <span class="docEmphasis">GLIBC_2.0</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">GLIBC_2.1</span>, and so on.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">VER_2</span> version tag also specifies that the new function <span class="docEmphasis">pqr()</span> is to be exported by the library and bound to the <span class="docEmphasis">VER_2</span> version tag. If we didn’t declare <span class="docEmphasis">pqr()</span> in this manner, then the <tt>local</tt> specification that <span class="docEmphasis">VER_2</span> version tag inherited from the <span class="docEmphasis">VER_1</span> version tag would make <span class="docEmphasis">pqr()</span> invisible outside the library. Note also that if we omitted the <tt>local</tt> specification altogether, then the symbols <span class="docEmphasis">xyz_old()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">xyz_new()</span> would also be exported by the library (which is typically not what we want).</p><p class="docText">We now build the new version of our library in the usual way:</p><pre>$ <b>gcc -g -c -fPIC -Wall sv_lib_v2.c</b>
$ <b>gcc -g -shared -o libsv.so sv_lib_v2.o -Wl,--version-script,sv_v2.map</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Now we can create a new program, <span class="docEmphasis">p2</span>, which uses the new definition of <span class="docEmphasis">xyz()</span>, while program <span class="docEmphasis">p1</span> uses the old version of <span class="docEmphasis">xyz()</span>.</p><pre>$ <b>gcc -g -o p2 sv_prog.c libsv.so </b>
$ <b>LD_LIBRARY_PATH=. ./p2 </b>
v2 xyz                                        <i> Uses</i> <span class="docEmphasis">xyz@VER_2</span>
$ <b>LD_LIBRARY_PATH=. ./p1 </b>
v1 xyz                                        <i> Uses</i> <span class="docEmphasis">xyz@VER_1</span></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The version tag dependencies of an executable are recorded at static link time. We can use <span class="docEmphasis">objdump -t</span> to display the symbol tables of each executable, thus showing the different version tag dependencies of each program:</p><pre>$ <b>objdump -t p1 | grep xyz</b>
08048380       F *UND*  0000002e              xyz@@VER_1
$ <b>objdump -t p2 | grep xyz</b>
080483a0       F *UND*  0000002e              xyz@@VER_2</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We can also use <span class="docEmphasis">readelf -s</span> to obtain similar information.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Further information about symbol versioning can be found using the command <span class="docEmphasis">info ld scripts version</span> and at http://people.redhat.com/drepper/symbol-versioning.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
