<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>42.4. Initialization and Finalization Functions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">42.4. Initialization and Finalization Functions</h3><p class="docText">It
 is possible to define one or more functions that are executed 
automatically when a shared library is loaded and unloaded. This allows 
us to perform initialization and finalization actions when working with 
shared libraries. Initialization and finalization functions are executed
 regardless of whether the library is loaded automatically or loaded 
explicitly using the <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen</span> interface (Section 42.1).</p><p class="docText">Initialization and finalization functions are defined using the <span class="docEmphasis">gcc</span> <tt>constructor</tt> and <tt>destructor</tt> attributes. Each function that is to be executed when the library is loaded should be defined as follows:</p><pre>void __attribute__ ((constructor)) some_name_load(void)
{
    /* Initialization code */
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Unload functions are similarly defined:</p><pre>void __attribute__ ((destructor)) some_name_unload(void)
{
    /* Finalization code */
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The function names <span class="docEmphasis">some_name_load()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">some_name_unload()</span> can be replaced by any desired names.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">It is also possible to use the <span class="docEmphasis">gcc</span> <tt>constructor</tt> and <tt>destructor</tt> attributes to create initialization and finalization functions in a main program.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJIAM">42.4.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ENIAM">42.4.1.1. The <span class="docEmphasis">_init()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">_fini()</span> functions</h5><p class="docText">An older technique for shared library initialization and finalization is to create two functions, <span class="docEmphasis">_init()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">_fini()</span>, as part of the library. The <span class="docEmphasis">void _init(void)</span> function contains code that is to executed when the library is first loaded by a process. The <span class="docEmphasis">void _fini(void)</span> function contains code that is to be executed when the library is unloaded.</p><p class="docText">If we create <span class="docEmphasis">_init()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">_fini()</span> functions, then we must specify the <span class="docEmphasis">gcc -nostartfiles</span>
 option when building the shared library, in order to prevent the linker
 from including default versions of these functions. (Using the <span class="docEmphasis">-Wl,-init</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">-Wl,-fini</span> linker options, we can choose alternative names for these two functions if desired.)</p><p class="docText">Use of <span class="docEmphasis">_init()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">_fini()</span> is now considered obsolete in favor of the <span class="docEmphasis">gcc</span> <tt>constructor</tt> and <tt>destructor</tt> attributes, which, among other advantages, allow us to define multiple initialization and finalization functions.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
