<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>42.6. Monitoring the Dynamic Linker: LD_DEBUG</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">42.6. Monitoring the Dynamic Linker: <tt>LD_DEBUG</tt></h3><p class="docText">Sometimes,
 it is useful to monitor the operation of the dynamic linker in order to
 know, for example, where it is searching for libraries. We can use the <tt>LD_DEBUG</tt>
 environment variable to do this. By setting this variable to one (or 
more) of a set of standard keywords, we can obtain various kinds of 
tracing information from the dynamic linker.</p><p class="docText">If we assign the value <span class="docEmphasis">help</span> to <tt>LD_DEBUG</tt>, the dynamic linker displays help information about <tt>LD_DEBUG</tt>, and the specified command is <span class="docEmphasis">not</span> executed:</p><pre>$ <b>LD_DEBUG=help date</b>
Valid options for the LD_DEBUG environment variable are:

  libs       display library search paths
  reloc      display relocation processing
  files      display progress for input file
  symbols    display symbol table processing
  bindings   display information about symbol binding
  versions   display version dependencies
  all        all previous options combined
  statistics display relocation statistics
  unused     determine unused DSOs
  help       display this help message and exit

To direct the debugging output into a file instead of standard output
a filename can be specified using the LD_DEBUG_OUTPUT environment variable.</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The following example shows 
an abridged version of the output provided when we request tracing of 
information about library searches:</p><pre>$ <b>LD_DEBUG=libs date</b>
     10687:     find library=librt.so.1 [0]; searching
     10687:      search cache=/etc/ld.so.cache
     10687:       trying file=/lib/librt.so.1
     10687:     find library=libc.so.6 [0]; searching
     10687:      search cache=/etc/ld.so.cache
     10687:       trying file=/lib/libc.so.6
     10687:     find library=libpthread.so.0 [0]; searching
     10687:      search cache=/etc/ld.so.cache
     10687:       trying file=/lib/libpthread.so.0
     10687:     calling init: /lib/libpthread.so.0
     10687:     calling init: /lib/libc.so.6
     10687:     calling init: /lib/librt.so.1
     10687:     initialize program: date
     10687:     transferring control: date
Tue Dec 28 17:26:56 CEST 2010
     10687:     calling fini: date [0]
     10687:     calling fini: /lib/librt.so.1 [0]
     10687:     calling fini: /lib/libpthread.so.0 [0]
     10687:     calling fini: /lib/libc.so.6 [0]</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The value 10687 displayed at 
the start of each line is the process ID of the process being traced. 
This is useful if we are monitoring several processes (e.g., parent and 
child).</p><p class="docText">By default, <tt>LD_DEBUG</tt> output is written to standard error, but we can direct it elsewhere by assigning a pathname to the <tt>LD_DEBUG_OUTPUT</tt> environment variable.</p><p class="docText">If desired, we can assign multiple options to <tt>LD_DEBUG</tt> by separating them with commas (no spaces should appear). The output of the <span class="docEmphasis">symbols</span> option (which traces symbol resolution by the dynamic linker) is particularly voluminous.</p><p class="docText"><tt>LD_DEBUG</tt> is effective both for libraries implicitly loaded by the dynamic linker and for libraries dynamically loaded by <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen()</span>.</p><p class="docText">For security reasons, <tt>LD_DEBUG</tt> is (since <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> 2.2.5) ignored in set-user-ID and set-group-ID programs.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
