<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>42.7. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">42.7. Summary</h3><p class="docText">The dynamic linker provides the <span class="docEmphasis">dlopen</span>
 API, which allows programs to explicitly load additional shared 
libraries at run time. This allows programs to implement plug-in 
functionality.</p><p class="docText">An
 important aspect of shared library design is controlling symbol 
visibility, so that the library exports only those symbols (functions 
and variables) that should actually be used by programs linked against 
the library. We looked at a range of techniques that can be used to 
control symbol visibility. Among these techniques was the use of version
 scripts, which provide fine-grained control of symbol visibility.</p><p class="docText">We
 also showed how version scripts can be used to implement a scheme that 
allows a single shared library to export multiple definitions of a 
symbol for use by different applications linked against the library. 
(Each application uses the definition that was current when the 
application was statically linked against the library.) This technique 
provides an alternative to the traditional library versioning approach 
of using major and minor version numbers in the shared library real 
name.</p><p class="docText">Defining 
initialization and finalization functions within a shared library allows
 us to automatically execute code when the library is loaded and 
unloaded.</p><p class="docText">The <tt>LD_PRELOAD</tt>
 environment variable allows us to preload shared libraries. Using this 
mechanism, we can selectively override functions and other symbols that 
the dynamic linker would normally find in other shared libraries.</p><p class="docText">We can assign various values to the <tt>LD_DEBUG</tt> environment variable in order to monitor the operation of the dynamic linker.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETJAM">42.7.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EXJAM">42.7.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">Refer to the sources of further information listed in Section 41.14.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
