<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>43.3. Synchronization Facilities</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">43.3. Synchronization Facilities</h3><p class="docText">The synchronization facilities shown in Figure 43-1
 allow processes to coordinate their actions. Synchronization allows 
processes to avoid doing things such as simultaneously updating a shared
 memory region or the same part of a file. Without synchronization, such
 simultaneous updates could cause an application to produce incorrect 
results.</p><p class="docText">UNIX systems provide the following synchronization facilities:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Semaphores</span>:
 A semaphore is a kernel-maintained integer whose value is never 
permitted to fall below 0. A process can decrease or increase the value 
of a semaphore. If an attempt is made to decrease the value of the 
semaphore below 0, then the kernel blocks the operation until the 
semaphore’s value increases to a level that permits the operation to be 
performed. (Alternatively, the process can request a nonblocking 
operation; then, instead of blocking, the kernel causes the operation to
 return immediately with an error indicating that the operation can’t be
 performed immediately.) The meaning of a semaphore is determined by the
 application. A process decrements a semaphore (from, say, 1 to 0) in 
order to reserve exclusive access to some shared resource, and after 
completing work on the resource, increments the semaphore so that the 
shared resource is released for use by some other process. The use of a 
binary semaphore—a semaphore whose value is limited to 0 or 1—is common.
 However, an application that deals with multiple instances of a shared 
resource would employ a semaphore whose maximum value equals the number 
of shared resources. Linux provides both System V semaphores and POSIX 
semaphores, which have essentially similar functionality.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">File locks</span>:
 File locks are a synchronization method explicitly designed to 
coordinate the actions of multiple processes operating on the same file.
 They can also be used to coordinate access to other shared resources. 
File locks come in two flavors: read (shared) locks and write 
(exclusive) locks. Any number of processes can hold a read lock on the 
same file (or region of a file). However, when one process holds a write
 lock on a file (or file region), other processes are prevented from 
holding either read or write locks on that file (or file region). Linux 
provides file-locking facilities via the <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> system calls. The <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span>
 system call provides a simple locking mechanism, allowing processes to 
place a shared or an exclusive lock on an entire file. Because of its 
limited functionality, <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> locking facility is rarely used nowadays. The <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>
 system call provides record locking, allowing processes to place 
multiple read and write locks on different regions of the same file.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Mutexes and condition variables</span>: These synchronization facilities are normally used with POSIX threads, as described in Chapter 30.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Some UNIX implementations, including Linux systems with a <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>
 that provides the NPTL threading implementation, also allow mutexes and
 condition variables to be shared between processes. SUSv3 permits, but 
doesn’t require, an implementation to support process-shared mutexes and
 condition variables. They are not available on all UNIX systems, and so
 are not commonly employed for process synchronization.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">When
 performing interprocess synchronization, our choice of facility is 
typically determined by the functional requirements. When coordinating 
access to a file, file record locking is usually the best choice. 
Semaphores are often the better choice for coordinating access to other 
types of shared resource.</p><p class="docText">Communication facilities can also be used for synchronization. For example, in Section 44.3,
 we show how a pipe can be used to synchronize the actions of a parent 
process with its children. More generally, any of the data-transfer 
facilities can be used for synchronization, with the synchronization 
operation taking the form of exchanging messages via the facility.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Since kernel 2.6.22, Linux provides an additional, nonstandard synchronization mechanism via the <span class="docEmphasis">eventfd()</span> system call. This system call creates an <span class="docEmphasis">eventfd</span>
 object that has an associated 8-byte unsigned integer maintained by the
 kernel. The system call returns a file descriptor that refers to the 
object. Writing an integer to this file descriptor adds that integer to 
the object’s value. A <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> from the file descriptor blocks if the object’s value is 0. If the object has a nonzero value, a <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> returns that value and resets it to 0. In addition, <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>
 can be used to test if the object has a nonzero value; if it does, the 
file descriptor indicates as being readable. An application that wishes 
to use an <span class="docEmphasis">eventfd</span> object for synchronization must first create the object using <span class="docEmphasis">eventfd()</span>, and then call <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> to create related processes that inherit file descriptors referring to the object. For further details, see the <span class="docEmphasis">eventfd(2)</span> manual page.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
