<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>43.4. Comparing IPC Facilities</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">43.4. Comparing IPC Facilities</h3><p class="docText">When
 it comes to IPC, we face a range of choices that can at first seem 
bewildering. In later chapters that describe each IPC facility, we 
include sections that compare each facility against other similar 
facilities. In the following pages, we consider a number of general 
points that may determine the choice of IPC facility.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EUOAM">43.4.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EYOAM">43.4.1.1. IPC object identification and handles for open objects</h5><p class="docText">In
 order to access an IPC object, a process must have some means of 
identifying the object, and once the object has been “opened,” the 
process must use some type of handle to refer to the open object. Table 43-1 summarizes these properties for the various types of IPC facilities.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 43-1. Identifiers and handles for various types of IPC facilities</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Facility type</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Name used to identify object</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Handle used to refer to object in programs</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Pipe</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">no name</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">file descriptor</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">FIFO</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">pathname</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">file descriptor</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">UNIX domain socket</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">pathname</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">file descriptor</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Internet domain socket</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">IP address + port number</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">file descriptor</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">System V message queue</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">System V IPC key</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">System V IPC identifier</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">System V semaphore</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">System V IPC key</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">System V IPC identifier</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">System V shared memory</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">System V IPC key</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">System V IPC identifier</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">POSIX message queue</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">POSIX IPC pathname</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">mqd_t</span> (message queue descriptor)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">POSIX named semaphore</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">POSIX IPC pathname</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">sem_t *</span> (semaphore pointer)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">POSIX unnamed semaphore</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">no name</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">sem_t *</span> (semaphore pointer)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">POSIX shared memory</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">POSIX IPC pathname</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">file descriptor</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Anonymous mapping</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">no name</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">none</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Memory-mapped file</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">pathname</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">file descriptor</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> lock</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">pathname</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">file descriptor</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> lock</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">pathname</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">file descriptor</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EDYAM">43.4.1.2. Functionality</h5><p class="docText">There
 are functional differences between the various IPC facilities that can 
be relevant in determining which facility to use. We begin by 
summarizing the differences between data-transfer facilities and shared 
memory:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Data-transfer
 facilities involve read and write operations, with transferred data 
being consumable by just one reader process. Flow control between writer
 and reader, as well as synchronization (so that a reader is blocked 
when trying to read data from a facility that is currently empty) is 
automatically handled by the kernel. This model fits well with many 
application designs.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Other
 application designs more naturally suit a shared-memory model. Shared 
memory allows one process to make data visible to any number of other 
processes sharing the same memory region. Communication “operations” are
 simple—a process can access data in shared memory in the same manner as
 it accesses any other memory in its virtual address space. On the other
 hand, the need to handle synchronization (and perhaps flow control) can
 add to the complexity of a shared-memory design. This model fits well 
with application designs that need to maintain shared state (e.g., a 
shared data structure).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">With respect to the various data-transfer facilities, the following points are worth noting:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Some
 data-transfer facilities transfer data as a byte stream (pipes, FIFOs, 
and stream sockets); others are message-oriented (message queues and 
datagram sockets). Which approach is preferable depends on the 
application. (An application can also impose a message-oriented model on
 a byte-stream facility, by using delimiter characters, fixed-length 
messages, or message headers that encode the length of the total 
message; see Section 44.8.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">A
 distinctive feature of System V and POSIX message queues, compared with
 other data-transfer facilities, is the ability to assign a numeric type
 or priority to a message, so that messages can be delivered in a 
different order from that in which they were sent.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Pipes,
 FIFOs, and sockets are implemented using file descriptors. These IPC 
facilities all support a range of alternative I/O models that we 
describe in Chapter 63: I/O multiplexing (the <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> system calls), signal-driven I/O, and the Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>
 API. The primary benefit of these techniques is that they allow an 
application to simultaneously monitor multiple file descriptors to see 
whether I/O is possible on any of them. By contrast, System V message 
queues don’t employ file descriptors and don’t support these techniques.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On
 Linux, POSIX message queues are also implemented using file descriptors
 and support the alternative I/O techniques described above. However, 
this behavior is not specified in SUSv3, and is not supported on most 
other implementations.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><ul><li><p class="docList">POSIX
 message queues provide a notification facility that can send a signal 
to a process, or instantiate a new thread, when a message arrives on a 
previously empty queue.</p></li><li><p class="docList">UNIX
 domain sockets provide a feature that allows a file descriptor to be 
passed from one process to another. This allows one process to open a 
file and make it available to another process that otherwise might not 
be able to access the file. We briefly describe this feature in Section 61.13.3.</p></li><li><p class="docList">UDP
 (Internet domain datagram) sockets allow a sender to broadcast or 
multicast a message to multiple recipients. We briefly describe this 
feature in Section 61.12.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">With respect to process-synchronization facilities, the following points are worth noting:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Record locks placed using <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>
 are considered to be owned by the process placing the lock. The kernel 
uses this ownership property to detect deadlocks (situations where two 
or more processes are holding locks that block each other’s further lock
 requests). If a deadlock situation occurs, the kernel denies the lock 
request of one of the processes, returning an error from the <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>
 call to indicate that a deadlock occurred. System V and POSIX 
semaphores don’t have an ownership property; no deadlock detection 
occurs for semaphores.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Record locks placed using <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>
 are automatically released when the process that owns the locks 
terminates. System V semaphores provide a similar feature in the form of
 an “undo” feature, but this feature is not reliable in all 
circumstances (Section 47.8). POSIX semaphores don’t provide an analog of this feature.</p></li></ul><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EF2AM">43.4.1.3. Network communication</h5><p class="docText">Of all of the IPC methods shown in Figure 43-1,
 only sockets permit processes to communicate over a network. Sockets 
are generally used in one of two domains: the UNIX domain, which allows 
communication between processes on the same system, and the <span class="docEmphasis">Internet</span>
 domain, which allows communication between processes on different hosts
 connected via a TCP/IP network. Often, only minor changes are required 
to convert a program that uses UNIX domain sockets into one that uses 
Internet domain sockets, so an application that is built using UNIX 
domain sockets can be made network-capable with relatively little 
effort.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E22AM">43.4.1.4. Portability</h5><p class="docText">Modern UNIX implementations support most of the IPC facilities shown in Figure 43-1.
 However, the POSIX IPC facilities (message queues, semaphores, and 
shared memory) are not quite as widely available as their System V IPC 
counterparts, especially on older UNIX systems. (An implementation of 
POSIX message queues and full support for POSIX semaphores have appeared
 on Linux only in the 2.6.<span class="docEmphasis">x</span> kernel series.) Therefore, from a portability point of view, System V IPC may be preferable to POSIX IPC.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ES3AM">43.4.1.5. System V IPC design issues</h5><p class="docText">The
 System V IPC facilities were designed independently of the traditional 
UNIX I/O model, and consequently suffer a few peculiarities that make 
their programming interfaces more complicated to use. The corresponding 
POSIX IPC facilities were designed to address these problems. The 
following points are of particular note:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The
 System V IPC facilities are connectionless. These facilities provide no
 notion of a handle (like a file descriptor) referring to an open IPC 
object. In later chapters, we’ll sometimes talk of “opening” a System V 
IPC object, but this is really just shorthand to describe the process of
 obtaining a handle to refer to the object. The kernel does not record 
the process as having “opened” the object (unlike other types of IPC 
objects). This means that the kernel can’t maintain a reference count of
 the number of processes that are currently using an object. 
Consequently, it can require additional programming effort for an 
application to be able to know when an object can safely be deleted.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The
 programming interfaces for the System V IPC facilities are inconsistent
 with the traditional UNIX I/O model (they use integer key values and 
IPC identifiers instead of pathnames and file descriptors). The 
programming interfaces are also overly complex. This last point applies 
particularly to System V semaphores (refer to Section 47.11 and Section 53.5).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">By
 contrast, the kernel counts open references for POSIX IPC objects. This
 simplifies decisions about when an object can be deleted. Furthermore, 
the POSIX IPC facilities provide an interface that is simpler and more 
consistent with the traditional UNIX model.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EN4AM">43.4.1.6. Accessibility</h5><p class="docText">The second column of Table 43-2
 summarizes an important characteristic of each type of IPC object: the 
permissions scheme that governs which processes can access the object. 
The following list adds some details on the various schemes:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">For
 some IPC facilities (e.g., FIFOs and sockets), object names live in the
 file system, and accessibility is determined according to the 
associated file permissions mask, which specifies permissions for owner,
 group, and other (Section 15.4).
 Although System V IPC objects don’t reside in the file system, each 
object has an associated permissions mask whose semantics are similar to
 those for files.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A few IPC facilities (pipes, anonymous memory mappings) are marked as being accessible only by related processes. Here, <span class="docEmphasis">related</span> means related via <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>. In order for two processes to access the object, one of them must create the object and then call <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>. As a consequence of the <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, the child process inherits a handle referring to the object, allowing both processes to share the object.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The
 accessibility of a POSIX unnamed semaphore is determined by the 
accessibility of the shared memory region containing the semaphore.</p></li><li><p class="docList">In
 order to place a lock on a file, a process must have a file descriptor 
referring to the file (i.e., in practice, it must have permission to 
open the file).</p></li><li><p class="docList">There
 are no restrictions on accessing (i.e., connecting or sending a 
datagram to) an Internet domain socket. If necessary, access control 
must be implemented within the application.</p></li></ul><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 43-2. Accessibility and persistence for various types of IPC facilities</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Facility type</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Accessibility</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Persistence</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Pipe</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">only by related processes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">process</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">FIFO</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">permissions mask</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">process</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">UNIX domain socket</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">permissions mask</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">process</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Internet domain socket</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">by any process</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">process</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">System V message queue</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">permissions mask</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">kernel</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">System V semaphore</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">permissions mask</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">kernel</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">System V shared memory</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">permissions mask</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">kernel</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">POSIX message queue</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">permissions mask</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">kernel</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">POSIX named semaphore</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">permissions mask</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">kernel</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">POSIX unnamed semaphore</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">permissions of underlying memory</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">depends</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">POSIX shared memory</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">permissions mask</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">kernel</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Anonymous mapping</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">only by related processes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">process</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Memory-mapped file</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">permissions mask</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">file system</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> file lock</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> of file</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">process</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> file lock</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> of file</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">process</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EUHBM">43.4.1.7. Persistence</h5><p class="docText">The term <span class="docEmphasis">persistence</span> refers to the lifetime of an IPC object. (Refer to the third column of Table 43-2.) We can distinguish three types of persistence:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Process persistence</span>:
 A process-persistent IPC object remains in existence only as long as it
 is held open by at least one process. If the object is closed by all 
processes, then all kernel resources associated with the object are 
freed, and any unread data is destroyed. Pipes, FIFOs, and sockets are 
examples of IPC facilities with process persistence.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The
 persistence of a FIFO’s data is not the same as the persistence of its 
name. A FIFO has a name in the file system that persists even after all 
file descriptors referring to the FIFO have been closed.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Kernel persistence</span>:
 A kernel-persistent IPC object exists until either it is explicitly 
deleted or the system is shut down. The lifetime of the object is 
independent of whether any process holds the object open. This means 
that, for example, one process can create an object, write data to it, 
and then close it (or terminate). At a later point, another process can 
open the object and read the data. Examples of facilities with kernel 
persistence are System V IPC and POSIX IPC. We exploit this property in 
the example programs that we present when describing these facilities in
 later chapters: for each facility, we implement separate programs that 
create an object, delete an object, and perform communication or 
synchronization.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">File-system persistence</span>:
 An IPC object with file-system persistence retains its information even
 when the system is rebooted. The object exists until it is explicitly 
deleted. The only type of IPC object that demonstrates file-system 
persistence is shared memory based on a memory-mapped file.</p></li></ul><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EGJBM">43.4.1.8. Performance</h5><p class="docText">In
 some circumstances, different IPC facilities may show notable 
differences in performance. However, in later chapters, we generally 
refrain from making performance comparisons, for the following reasons:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The
 performance of an IPC facility may not be a significant factor in the 
overall performance of an application, and it may not be the only factor
 in determining the choice of an IPC facility.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The
 relative performance of the various IPC facilities may vary across UNIX
 implementations or between different versions of the Linux kernel.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Most
 importantly, the performance of an IPC facility will vary depending on 
the precise manner and environment in which it is used. Relevant factors
 include the size of the data units exchanged in each IPC operation, the
 amount of unread data that may be outstanding on the IPC facility, 
whether or not a process context switch is required for each unit of 
data exchanged, and other load on the system.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">If
 IPC performance is crucial, there is no substitute for 
application-specific benchmarks run under an environment that matches 
the target system. To this end, it may be worth writing an abstract 
software layer that hides details of the IPC facility from the 
application and then testing performance when different IPC facilities 
are substituted underneath the abstract layer.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
