<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>44.6. Pipes and stdio Buffering</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">44.6. Pipes and <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> Buffering</h3><p class="docText">Since the file stream pointer returned by a call to <span class="docEmphasis">popen()</span> doesn’t refer to a terminal, the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> library applies block buffering to the file stream (Section 13.2). This means that when we call <span class="docEmphasis">popen()</span> with a <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> of <span class="docEmphasis">w</span>, then, by default, output is sent to the child process at the other end of the pipe only when the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffer is filled or we close the pipe with <span class="docEmphasis">pclose()</span>.
 In many cases, this presents no problem. If, however, we need to ensure
 that the child process receives data on the pipe immediately, then we 
can either use periodic calls to <span class="docEmphasis">fflush()</span> or disable <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffering using the call <span class="docEmphasis">setbuf(fp, NULL)</span>. This technique can also be used if we create a pipe using the <span class="docEmphasis">pipe()</span> system call and then use <span class="docEmphasis">fdopen()</span> to obtain a <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> stream corresponding to the write end of the pipe.</p><p class="docText">If the process calling <span class="docEmphasis">popen()</span> is reading from the pipe (i.e., <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> is <span class="docEmphasis">r</span>), things may not be so straightforward. In this case, if the child process is using the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> library, then—unless it includes explicit calls to <span class="docEmphasis">fflush()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">setbuf()</span>—its output will be available to the calling process only when the child either fills the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffer or calls <span class="docEmphasis">fclose()</span>. (The same statement applies if we are reading from a pipe created using <span class="docEmphasis">pipe()</span> and the process writing on the other end is using the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span>
 library.) If this is a problem, there is little we can do unless we can
 modify the source code of the program running in the child process to 
include calls to <span class="docEmphasis">setbuf()</span> of <span class="docEmphasis">fflush()</span>.</p><p class="docText">If
 modifying the source code is not an option, then instead of using a 
pipe, we could use a pseudoterminal. A pseudoterminal is an IPC channel 
that appears to the process on one end as though it is a terminal. 
Consequently, the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> library line buffers output. We describe pseudoterminals in Chapter 64.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
