<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>44.11. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">44.11. Summary</h3><p class="docText">Pipes
 were the first method of IPC under the UNIX system, and they are used 
frequently by the shell, as well as in other applications. A pipe is a 
unidirectional, limited-capacity byte stream that can be used for 
communication between related processes. Although blocks of data of any 
size can be written to a pipe, only writes that do not exceed <tt>PIPE_BUF</tt>
 bytes are guaranteed to be atomic. As well as being used as a method of
 IPC, pipes can also be used for process synchronization.</p><p class="docText">When
 using pipes, we must be careful to close unused descriptors in order to
 ensure that reading processes detect end-of-file and writing processes 
receive the <tt>SIGPIPE</tt> signal or the <tt>EPIPE</tt> error. (Usually, it is easiest to have the application writing to a pipe ignore <tt>SIGPIPE</tt> and detect a “broken” pipe via the <tt>EPIPE</tt> error.)</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">popen()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">pclose()</span>
 functions allow a program to transfer data to or from a standard shell 
command, without needing to handle the details of creating a pipe, 
execing a shell, and closing unused file descriptors.</p><p class="docText">FIFOs operate in exactly the same way as pipes, except that they are created using <span class="docEmphasis">mkfifo()</span>,
 have a name in the file system, and can be opened by any process with 
appropriate permissions. By default, opening a FIFO for reading blocks 
until another process opens the FIFO for writing, and vice versa.</p><p class="docText">In
 the course of this chapter, we looked at a number of related topics. 
First, we saw how to duplicate file descriptors in such a manner that 
the standard input or output of a filter can be bound to a pipe. While 
presenting a client-server example using FIFOs, we touched on a number 
of topics in client-server design, including the use of a well-known 
address for a server and iterative versus concurrent server design. In 
developing the example FIFO application, we noted that, although data 
transmitted through a pipe is a byte stream, it is sometimes useful for 
communicating processes to package the data into messages, and we looked
 at various ways in which this could be accomplished.</p><p class="docText">Finally, we noted the effect of the <tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt> (nonblocking I/O) flag when opening and performing I/O on a FIFO. The <tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt>
 flag is useful if we don’t want to block while opening a FIFO. It is 
also useful if we don’t want reads to block if no data is available, or 
writes to block if there is insufficient space within a pipe or FIFO.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6CBM">44.11.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EDDBM">44.11.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">The
 implementation of pipes is discussed in [Bach, 1986] and [Bovet &amp; 
Cesati, 2005]. Useful details about pipes and FIFOs can also be found in
 [Vahalia, 1996].</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
