<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>44.12. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">44.12. Exercises</h3><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write
 a program that uses two pipes to enable bidirectional communication 
between a parent and child process. The parent process should loop 
reading a block of text from standard input and use one of the pipes to 
send the text to the child, which converts it to uppercase and sends it 
back to the parent via the other pipe. The parent reads the data coming 
back from the child and echoes it on standard output before continuing 
around the loop once more.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Implement <span class="docEmphasis">popen()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">pclose()</span>. Although these functions are simplified by not requiring the signal handling employed in the implementation of <span class="docEmphasis">system()</span> (Section 27.7),
 you will need to be careful to correctly bind the pipe ends to file 
streams in each process, and to ensure that all unused descriptors 
referring to the pipe ends are closed. Since children created by 
multiple calls to <span class="docEmphasis">popen()</span> may be running at one time, you will need to maintain a data structure that associates the file stream pointers allocated by <span class="docEmphasis">popen()</span> with the corresponding child process IDs. (If using an array for this purpose, the value returned by the <span class="docEmphasis">fileno()</span>
 function, which obtains the file descriptor corresponding to a file 
stream, can be used to index the array.) Obtaining the correct process 
ID from this structure will allow <span class="docEmphasis">pclose()</span>
 to select the child upon which to wait. This structure will also assist
 with the SUSv3 requirement that any still-open file streams created by 
earlier calls to <span class="docEmphasis">popen()</span> must be closed in the new child process.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The server in Example 44-7 (<tt>fifo_seqnum_server.c</tt>)
 always starts assigning sequence numbers from 0 each time it is 
started. Modify the program to use a backup file that is updated each 
time a sequence number is assigned. (The <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> <tt>O_SYNC</tt> flag, described in Section 4.3.1,
 may be useful.) At startup, the program should check for the existence 
of this file, and if it is present, use the value it contains to 
initialize the sequence number. If the backup file can’t be found on 
startup, the program should create a new file and start assigning 
sequence numbers beginning at 0. (An alternative to this technique would
 be to use memory-mapped files, described in Chapter 49.)</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Add code to the server in Example 44-7 (<tt>fifo_seqnum_server.c</tt>) so that if the program receives the <tt>SIGINT</tt> or <tt>SIGTERM</tt> signals, it removes the server FIFO and terminates.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The server in Example 44-7 (<tt>fifo_seqnum_server.c</tt>) performs a second <tt>O_WRONLY</tt> open of the FIFO so that it never sees end-of-file when reading from the reading descriptor (<span class="docEmphasis">serverFd</span>)
 of the FIFO. Instead of doing this, an alternative approach could be 
tried: whenever the server sees end-of-file on the reading descriptor, 
it closes the descriptor, and then once more opens the FIFO for reading.
 (This open would block until the next client opened the FIFO for 
writing.) What is wrong with this approach?</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The server in Example 44-7 (<tt>fifo_seqnum_server.c</tt>)
 assumes that the client process is well behaved. If a misbehaving 
client created a client FIFO and sent a request to the server, but did 
not open its FIFO, then the server’s attempt to open the client FIFO 
would block, and other client’s requests would be indefinitely delayed. 
(If done maliciously, this would constitute a <span class="docEmphasis">denial-of-service attack</span>.) Devise a scheme to deal with this problem. Extend the server (and possibly the client in Example 44-8) accordingly.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write programs to verify the operation of nonblocking opens and nonblocking I/O on FIFOs (see Section 44.9).</p></div></li></ol></div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
