<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 45. Introduction to System V IPC</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0EECBM">Chapter 45. Introduction to System V IPC</h2><p class="docText">System V IPC is the label used to refer to three different mechanisms for interprocess communication:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Message queues</span>
 can be used to pass messages between processes. Message queues are 
somewhat like pipes, but differ in two important respects. First, 
message boundaries are preserved, so that readers and writers 
communicate in units of messages, rather than via an undelimited byte 
stream. Second, each message includes an integer <span class="docEmphasis">type</span> field, and it is possible to select messages by type, rather than reading them in the order in which they were written.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Semaphores</span>
 permit multiple processes to synchronize their actions. A semaphore is a
 kernel-maintained integer value that is visible to all processes that 
have the necessary permissions. A process indicates to its peers that it
 is performing some action by making an appropriate modification to the 
value of the semaphore.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Shared memory</span> enables multiple processes to share the same region (called a <span class="docEmphasis">segment</span>)
 of memory (i.e., the same page frames are mapped into the virtual 
memory of multiple processes). Since access to user-space memory is a 
fast operation, shared memory is one of the quickest methods of IPC: 
once one process has updated the shared memory, the change is 
immediately visible to other processes sharing the same segment.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Although
 these three IPC mechanisms are quite diverse in function, there are 
good reasons for discussing them together. One reason is that they were 
developed together, first appearing in the late 1970s in Columbus UNIX. 
This was a Bell-internal UNIX implementation used for database and 
transaction-processing systems for telephone company record keeping and 
administration. Around 1983, these IPC mechanisms made their way into 
mainstream UNIX by appearing in System V—hence the appellation System V 
IPC.</p><p class="docText">A
 more significant reason for discussing the System V IPC mechanisms 
together is that their programming interfaces share a number of common 
characteristics, so that many of the same concepts apply to all of these
 mechanisms.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Because System V IPC is required by SUSv3 for XSI conformance, it is sometimes alternatively labeled <span class="docEmphasis">XSI IPC</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">This
 chapter provides an overview of the System V IPC mechanisms and details
 those features that are common to all three mechanisms. The three 
mechanisms are then discussed individually in the following chapters.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">System V IPC is a kernel option that is configured via the CONFIG_SYSVIPC option.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
