<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>45.1. API Overview</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">45.1. API Overview</h3><p class="docText">Table 45-1 summarizes the header files and system calls used for working with System V IPC objects.</p><p class="docText">Some implementations require the inclusion of <tt>&lt;sys/types.h&gt;</tt> before including the header files shown in Table 45-1. Some older UNIX implementations may also require the inclusion of <tt>&lt;sys/ipc.h&gt;</tt>. (No versions of the Single UNIX Specification required these header files.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On most hardware architectures on which Linux is implemented, a single system call (<span class="docEmphasis">ipc(2)</span>) acts as the entry point to the kernel for all System V IPC operations, and all of the calls listed in Table 45-1
 are actually implemented as library functions layered on top of this 
system call. (Two exceptions to this arrangement are Alpha and IA-64, 
where the functions listed in the table really are implemented as 
individual system calls.) This somewhat unusual approach is an artifact 
of the initial implementation of System V IPC as a loadable kernel 
module. Although they are actually library functions on most Linux 
architectures, throughout this chapter, we’ll refer to the functions in Table 45-1 as system calls. Only implementers of C libraries need to use <span class="docEmphasis">ipc(2)</span>; any other use in applications is not portable.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 45-1. Summary of programming interfaces for System V IPC objects</h5></caption><colgroup span="4"><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Interface</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Message queues</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Semaphores</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Shared memory</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Header file</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>&lt;sys/msg.h&gt;</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>&lt;sys/sem.h&gt;</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>&lt;sys/shm.h&gt;</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Associated data structure</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">msqid_ds</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">semid_ds</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">shmid_ds</span></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Create/open object</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">msgget()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">semget()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">shmget()</span> + <span class="docEmphasis">shmat()</span></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Close object</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">(none)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">(none)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">shmdt()</span></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Control operations</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">msgctl()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">semctl()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">shmctl()</span></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Performing IPC</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">msgsnd()</span>—write message <span class="docEmphasis">msgrcv()</span>—read message</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span>—test/adjust semaphore</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">access memory in shared region</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E1LBM">45.1.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E5LBM">45.1.1.1. Creating and opening a System V IPC object</h5><p class="docText">Each System V IPC mechanism has an associated <span class="docEmphasis">get</span> system call (<span class="docEmphasis">msgget()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">semget()</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">shmget()</span>), which is analogous to the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> system call used for files. Given an integer <span class="docEmphasis">key</span> (analogous to a filename), the <span class="docEmphasis">get</span> call either:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">creates a new IPC object with the given key and returns a unique identifier for that object; or</p></li><li><p class="docList">returns the identifier of an existing IPC object with the given key.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">We’ll (loosely) term the second use <span class="docEmphasis">opening</span> an existing IPC object. In this case, all that the <span class="docEmphasis">get</span> call is doing is converting one number (the key) into another number (the identifier).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In the context of System V IPC, the <span class="docEmphasis">object</span>
 doesn’t carry any of the connotations associated with object-oriented 
programming. The term merely serves to distinguish the System V IPC 
mechanisms from files. Although there are several analogies between 
files and System V IPC objects, the use of IPC objects differs in 
several important respects from the standard UNIX file I/O model, and 
this is a source of some complications when using the System V IPC 
mechanisms.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">An IPC <span class="docEmphasis">identifier</span>
 is analogous to a file descriptor in that it is used in all subsequent 
system calls to refer to the IPC object. There is, however, an important
 semantic difference. Whereas a file descriptor is a process attribute, 
an IPC identifier is a property of the object itself and is visible 
system-wide. All processes accessing the same object use the same 
identifier. This means that if we know an IPC object already exists, we 
can skip the <span class="docEmphasis">get</span>
 call, provided we have some other means of knowing the identifier of 
the object. For example, the process that created the object might write
 the identifier to a file that can then be read by other processes.</p><p class="docText">The following example shows how to create a System V message queue:</p><pre>id = msgget(key, IPC_CREAT | S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR);
if (id == -1)
    errExit("msgget");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">As with all of the <span class="docEmphasis">get</span>
 calls, the key is the first argument, and the identifier is returned as
 the function result. We specify the permissions to be placed on the new
 object as part of the final (<span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>) argument to the <span class="docEmphasis">get</span> call, using the same bit-mask constants as are used for files (Table 15-4, in Section 15.4.1). In the above example, permission is granted to just the owner of the object to read and write messages on the queue.</p><p class="docText">The process umask (Section 15.4.6) is not applied to the permissions placed on a newly created IPC object.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Several UNIX implementations define the following bit-mask constants for IPC permissions: <tt>MSG_R, MSG_W, SEM_R, SEM_A, SHM_R</tt>, and <tt>SHM_W</tt>.
 These correspond to owner (user) read and write permissions for each 
IPC mechanism. To get the corresponding group and other permission bit 
masks, these constants can be right-shifted 3 and 6 bits. These 
constants are not specified by SUSv3, which employs the same bit masks 
as are used for files, and are not defined in <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> headers.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Each process that wants to access the same IPC object performs a <span class="docEmphasis">get</span>
 call specifying the same key in order to obtain the same identifier for
 that object. We consider how to choose a key for an application in 
Section 45.2.</p><p class="docText">If no IPC object corresponding to the given key currently exists, and <tt>IPC_CREAT</tt> (analogous to the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> <tt>O_CREAT</tt> flag) was specified as part of the <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> argument, then the <span class="docEmphasis">get</span> call creates a new IPC object. If no corresponding IPC object currently exists, and <tt>IPC_CREAT</tt> was not specified (and the key was not specified as <tt>IPC_PRIVATE</tt>, described in Section 45.2), then the <span class="docEmphasis">get</span> call fails with the error <tt>ENOENT</tt>.</p><p class="docText">A process can guarantee that it is the one creating an IPC object by specifying the <tt>IPC_EXCL</tt> flag (analogous to the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> <tt>O_EXCL</tt> flag). If <tt>IPC_EXCL</tt> is specified and the IPC object corresponding to the given key already exists, then the <span class="docEmphasis">get</span> call fails with the error <tt>EEXIST</tt>.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EMSBM">45.1.1.2. IPC object deletion and object persistence</h5><p class="docText">The ctl system call (<span class="docEmphasis">msgctl(), semctl(), shmctl()</span>) for each System V IPC mechanism performs a range of <span class="docEmphasis">control operations</span>
 for the object. Many of these operations are specific to the IPC 
mechanism, but a few are generic to all IPC mechanisms. An example of a 
generic control operation is <tt>IPC_RMID</tt>, which is used to delete an object. For example, we can use the following call to delete a shared memory object:</p><pre>if (shmctl(id, IPC_RMID, NULL) == -1)
    errExit("shmctl");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">For message queues and 
semaphores, deletion of the IPC object is immediate, and any information
 contained within the object is destroyed, regardless of whether any 
other process is still using the object. (This is one of a number of 
points where the operation of System IPC objects is not analogous to 
files. In Section 18.3,
 we saw that if we remove the last link to a file, then the file is 
actually removed only after all open file descriptors referring to it 
have been closed.)</p><p class="docText">Deletion of shared memory objects occurs differently. Following the <span class="docEmphasis">shmctl(id, IPC_RMID, NULL)</span> call, the shared memory segment is removed only after all processes using the segment detach it (using <span class="docEmphasis">shmdt()</span>). (This is much closer to the situation with file deletion.)</p><p class="docText">System
 V IPC objects have kernel persistence. Once created, an object 
continues to exist until it is explicitly deleted or the system is shut 
down. This property of System V IPC objects can be advantageous. It is 
possible for a process to create an object, modify its state, and then 
exit, leaving the object to be accessed by some process that is started 
at a later time. It can also be disadvantageous for the following 
reasons:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">There are
 system-imposed limits on the number of IPC objects of each type. If we 
fail to remove unused objects, we may eventually encounter application 
errors as a result of reaching these limits.</p></li><li><p class="docList">When
 deleting a message queue or semaphore object, a multiprocess 
application may not be able to easily determine which will be the last 
process requiring access to the object, and thus when the object can be 
safely deleted. The problem is that these objects are <span class="docEmphasis">connectionless</span>—the
 kernel doesn’t keep a record of which processes have the object open. 
(This disadvantage doesn’t apply for shared memory segments, because of 
their different deletion semantics, described above.)</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
