<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>45.2. IPC Keys</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">45.2. IPC Keys</h3><p class="docText">System V IPC keys are integer values represented using the data type <span class="docEmphasis">key_t</span>. The IPC <span class="docEmphasis">get</span>
 calls translate a key into the corresponding integer IPC identifier. 
These calls guarantee that if we create a new IPC object, then that 
object will have a unique identifier, and that if we specify the key of 
an existing object, then we’ll always obtain the (same) identifier for 
that object. (Internally, the kernel maintains data structures mapping 
keys to identifiers for each IPC mechanism, as described in Section 
45.5.)</p><p class="docText">So,
 how do we provide a unique key—one that guarantees that we won’t 
accidentally obtain the identifier of an existing IPC object used by 
some other application? There are three possibilities:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Randomly
 choose some integer key value, which is typically placed in a header 
file included by all programs using the IPC object. The difficulty with 
this approach is that we may accidentally choose a value used by another
 application.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Specify the <tt>IPC_PRIVATE</tt> constant as the <span class="docEmphasis">key</span> value to the <span class="docEmphasis">get</span>
 call when creating the IPC object, which always results in the creation
 of a new IPC object that is guaranteed to have a unique key.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Employ the <span class="docEmphasis">ftok()</span> function to generate a (likely unique) key.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Using either <tt>IPC_PRIVATE</tt> or <span class="docEmphasis">ftok()</span> is the usual technique.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EBGBM">45.2.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EFGBM">45.2.1.1. Generating a unique key with <tt>IPC_PRIVATE</tt></h5><p class="docText">When creating a new IPC object, the key may be specified as <tt>IPC_PRIVATE</tt>, as follows:</p><pre>id = msgget(IPC_PRIVATE, S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case, it is not necessary to specify the <tt>IPC_CREAT</tt> or <tt>IPC_EXCL</tt> flags.</p><p class="docText">This
 technique is especially useful in multiprocess applications where the 
parent process creates the IPC object prior to performing a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>,
 with the result that the child inherits the identifier of the IPC 
object. We can also use this technique in client-server applications 
(i.e., those involving unrelated processes), but the clients must have a
 means of obtaining the identifiers of the IPC objects created by the 
server (and vice versa). For example, after creating an IPC object, the 
server could then write its identifier to a file that can be read by the
 clients.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E2HBM">45.2.1.2. Generating a unique key with <span class="docEmphasis">ftok()</span></h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">ftok()</span> (<span class="docEmphasis">file to key</span>) function returns a key value suitable for use in a subsequent call to one of the System V IPC <span class="docEmphasis">get</span> system calls.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/ipc.h&gt;

key_t <b>ftok</b>(char *<span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">proj</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns integer key on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">This key value is generated from the supplied <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">proj</span> value using an implementation-defined algorithm. SUSv3 makes the following requirements:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Only the least significant 8 bits of <span class="docEmphasis">proj</span> are employed by the algorithm.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The application must ensure that the <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> refers to an existing file to which <span class="docEmphasis">stat()</span> can be applied (otherwise, <span class="docEmphasis">ftok()</span> returns -1).</p></li><li><p class="docList">If different pathnames (links) referring to the same file (i.e., i-node) are supplied to <span class="docEmphasis">ftok()</span> with the same <span class="docEmphasis">proj</span> value, the same key value must be returned.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">To put things another way, <span class="docEmphasis">ftok()</span> uses the i-node number rather than the name of the file to generate the key value. (Because the <span class="docEmphasis">ftok()</span>
 algorithm depends on the i-node number, the file should not be removed 
and re-created during the life of the application, since it is likely 
that the file will be re-created with a different i-node number.) The 
purpose of the <span class="docEmphasis">proj</span>
 value is simply to allow us to generate multiple keys from the same 
file, which is useful when an application needs to create multiple IPC 
objects of the same type. Historically, the <span class="docEmphasis">proj</span> argument was of type <span class="docEmphasis">char</span>, and it is often specified as such in calls to <span class="docEmphasis">ftok()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">SUSv3 leaves the behavior of <span class="docEmphasis">ftok()</span> unspecified if <span class="docEmphasis">proj</span> is 0. Under AIX 5.1, <span class="docEmphasis">ftok()</span> returns -1 if <span class="docEmphasis">proj</span> is specified as 0. On Linux, this value has no special meaning. Nevertheless, portable applications should avoid specifying <span class="docEmphasis">proj</span> as 0; this still leaves a choice of 255 other values.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Normally, the <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> given to <span class="docEmphasis">ftok()</span>
 refers to one of the files or directories that forms part of, or is 
created by, the application, and cooperating processes pass the same <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span> to <span class="docEmphasis">ftok()</span>.</p><p class="docText">On Linux, the key returned by <span class="docEmphasis">ftok()</span> is a 32-bit value, created by taking the least significant 8 bits from the <span class="docEmphasis">proj</span>
 argument, the least significant 8 bits of the device number (i.e., the 
minor device number) of the device containing the file system in which 
the file resides, and the least significant 16 bits of the i-node number
 of the file referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>. (The last two pieces of information are obtained by calling <span class="docEmphasis">stat()</span> on <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>.)</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">glibc ftok()</span>
 algorithm is similar to that employed on other UNIX implementations, 
and suffers a similar limitation: there is a (very small) possibility 
that two different files could yield the same key value. This can occur 
because there is a chance that the least significant bits of an i-node 
number could be the same for two files on different file systems, 
coupled with the possibility that two different disk devices (on a 
system with multiple disk controllers) could have the same minor device 
number. However, in practice, the possibility of colliding key values 
for different applications is small enough that the use of <span class="docEmphasis">ftok()</span> for key generation is a viable technique.</p><p class="docText">A typical usage of <span class="docEmphasis">ftok()</span> is the following:</p><pre>key_t key;
int id;

key = ftok("/mydir/myfile", 'x');
if (key == -1)
    errExit("ftok");
id = msgget(key, IPC_CREAT | S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR);
if (id == -1)
    errExit("msgget");</pre><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
