<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>45.3. Associated Data Structure and Object Permissions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">45.3. Associated Data Structure and Object Permissions</h3><p class="docText">The
 kernel maintains an associated data structure for each instance of a 
System V IPC object. The form of this data structure varies according to
 the IPC mechanism (message queue, semaphore, or shared memory) and is 
defined in the corresponding header file for the IPC mechanism (see Table 45-1). We discuss mechanism-specific details of each of these data structures in the following chapters.</p><p class="docText">The associated data structure for an IPC object is initialized when the object is created via the appropriate <span class="docEmphasis">get</span> system call. Once the object has been created, a program can obtain a copy of this data structure using the appropriate <span class="docEmphasis">ctl</span> system call, by specifying an operation type of <tt>IPC_STAT</tt>. Conversely, some parts of the data structure can be modified using the <tt>IPC_SET</tt> operation.</p><p class="docText">As
 well as data specific to the type of IPC object, the associated data 
structure for all three IPC mechanisms includes a substructure, <span class="docEmphasis">ipc_perm</span>, that holds information used to determine permissions granted on the object:</p><pre>struct ipc_perm {
    key_t          __key;           /* Key, as supplied to 'get' call */
    uid_t          uid;             /* Owner's user ID */
    gid_t          gid;             /* Owner's group ID */
    uid_t          cuid;            /* Creator's user ID */
    gid_t          cgid;            /* Creator's group ID */
    unsigned short mode;            /* Permissions */
    unsigned short __seq;           /* Sequence number */
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">SUSv3 mandates all of the <span class="docEmphasis">ipc_perm</span> fields shown here, except <span class="docEmphasis">__key</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">__seq</span>. However, most UNIX implementations provide some version of these fields.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">uid</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">gid</span> fields specify the ownership of the IPC object. The <span class="docEmphasis">cuid</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">cgid</span>
 fields hold the user and group IDs of the process that created the 
object. Initially, the corresponding user and creator ID fields have the
 same values, which are taken from the effective IDs of the calling 
processes. The creator IDs are immutable, but the owner IDs can be 
changed via the <tt>IPC_SET</tt> operation. 
The following code demonstrates how to change the uid field for a shared
 memory segment (the associated data structure is of type <span class="docEmphasis">shmid_ds</span>):</p><pre>struct shmid_ds shmds;

if (shmctl(id, IPC_STAT, &amp;shmds) == -1)     /* Fetch from kernel */
    errExit("shmctl");
shmds.shm_perm.uid = newuid;                /* Change owner UID */
if (shmctl(id, IPC_SET, &amp;shmds) == -1)      /* Update kernel copy */
    errExit("shmctl");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> field of the <span class="docEmphasis">ipc_perm</span> substructure holds the permissions mask for the IPC object. These permissions are initialized using the lower 9 bits of the <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> specified in the <span class="docEmphasis">get</span> system call used to create the object, but can be changed subsequently using the <tt>IPC_SET</tt> operation.</p><p class="docText">As with files, permissions are broken into three categories—<span class="docEmphasis">owner</span> (also known as <span class="docEmphasis">user</span>), <span class="docEmphasis">group</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">other</span>—and
 it is possible to specify different permissions for each category. 
There are, however, some notable differences from the scheme used for 
files:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Only read and write permissions are meaningful for IPC objects. (For semaphores, write permission is commonly referred to as <span class="docEmphasis">alter</span> permission.) Execute permission is meaningless, and is ignored when performing most access checks.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Permission
 checks are made according to a process’s effective user ID, effective 
group IDs, and supplementary group IDs. (This contrasts with file-system
 permission checks on Linux, which are performed using the process’s 
file-system IDs, as described in Section 9.5.)</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The precise rules governing the permissions a process is granted on an IPC object are as follows:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If the process is privileged (<tt>CAP_IPC_OWNER</tt>), then all permissions are granted on the IPC object.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If
 the effective user ID of the process matches either the owner or the 
creator user ID of the IPC object, then the process is granted the 
permissions defined for the <span class="docEmphasis">owner</span> (<span class="docEmphasis">user</span>) of the object.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If
 the effective group ID or any of the supplementary group IDs of the 
process match either the owner group ID or the creator group ID of the 
IPC object, then the process is granted the <span class="docEmphasis">group</span> permissions defined for the object.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Otherwise, the process is granted the permissions defined for <span class="docEmphasis">other</span>.</p></div></li></ol></div><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In
 the kernel code, the above tests are constructed so that the test to 
see whether a process is privileged is performed only if the process is 
not granted the permissions it needs via one of the other tests. This is
 done to avoid unnecessarily setting the <tt>ASU</tt> process accounting flag, which indicates that the process made use of superuser privileges (Section 28.1).</p><p class="docText">Note that neither the use of the <tt>IPC_PRIVATE</tt> key value nor the presence of <tt>IPC_EXCL</tt>
 flag has any bearing on which processes may access an IPC object; such 
access is determined solely by the ownership and permissions of the 
object.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">How
 read and write permissions are interpreted for an object, and whether 
they are required, depend on the type of object and on the operation 
being performed.</p><p class="docText">When a <span class="docEmphasis">get</span>
 call is performed to obtain the identifier of an existing IPC object, 
an initial permission check is made to ascertain whether the permissions
 specified in the <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> argument are compatible with those on the existing object. If not, then the <span class="docEmphasis">get</span> call fails with the error <tt>EACCES</tt>.
 (Except as otherwise noted, this error code is also returned when 
permissions are denied in each of the cases listed below.) To 
illustrate, consider the example of two different users in the same 
group, with one user creating a message queue using the following call:</p><pre>msgget(key, IPC_CREAT | S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR | S_IRGRP);
                        /* rw-r----- */</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">An attempt by the second user to
 obtain an identifier for this message queue using the following call 
would fail, since the user is not permitted write access to the message 
queue:</p><pre>msgget(key, S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The second user could bypass this check by specifying 0 for the second argument of the <span class="docEmphasis">msgget()</span>
 call, in which case an error would occur only when the program 
attempted an operation requiring write permission on the IPC object 
(e.g., writing a message with <span class="docEmphasis">msgsnd()</span>).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">get</span>
 call represents the one case where execute permission is not ignored. 
Even though it has no meaning for IPC objects, if execute permission is 
requested in a <span class="docEmphasis">get</span> call for an existing object, then a check is made to see if that permission is granted.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The permissions required for other common operations are as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">To
 retrieve information from the object (e.g., to read a message from a 
message queue, obtain the value of a semaphore, or attach a shared 
memory segment for read access) requires read permission.</p></li><li><p class="docList">To
 update information within the object (e.g., to write a message to a 
message queue, change the value of a semaphore, or attach a shared 
memory segment for write access) requires write permission.</p></li><li><p class="docList">To obtain a copy of the associated data structure for an IPC object (the <tt>IPC_STAT</tt> <span class="docEmphasis">ctl</span> operation) requires read permission.</p></li><li><p class="docList">To remove an IPC object (the <tt>IPC_RMID</tt> <span class="docEmphasis">ctl</span> operation) or change its associated data structure (the <tt>IPC_SET</tt> <span class="docEmphasis">ctl</span> operation) requires neither read nor write permission. Rather, the calling process must either be privileged (<tt>CAP_SYS_ADMIN</tt>) or have an effective user ID matching either the owner user ID or the creator user ID of the object (otherwise, the error <tt>EPERM</tt> results).</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">It is possible to set the permissions on an IPC object so that the owner or creator can no longer use <tt>IPC_STAT</tt>
 to obtain the associated data structure containing the object 
permissions (which means that the object won’t be displayed by the <span class="docEmphasis">ipcs(1)</span> command described in Section 45.6), although <tt>IPC_SET</tt> can still be used to change them.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Various other mechanism-specific operations require read or write permission, or the <tt>CAP_IPC_OWNER</tt> capability. We note the required permissions in the following chapters as the operations are described.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
