<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>45.4. IPC Identifiers and Client-Server Applications</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">45.4. IPC Identifiers and Client-Server Applications</h3><p class="docText">In
 client-server applications, the server typically creates the System V 
IPC objects, while the client simply accesses them. In other words, the 
server performs an IPC <span class="docEmphasis">get</span> call specifying the flag <tt>IPC_CREAT</tt>, while the client omits this flag in its <span class="docEmphasis">get</span> call.</p><p class="docText">Suppose
 a client engages in an extended dialogue with a server, with multiple 
IPC operations being performed by each process (e.g., multiple messages 
exchanged, a sequence of semaphore operations, or multiple updates to 
shared memory). What happens if the server process crashes or is 
deliberately halted and then restarted? At this point, it would make no 
sense to blindly reuse the existing IPC object created by the previous 
server process, since the new server process has no knowledge of the 
historical information associated with the current state of the IPC 
object. (For example, there may be a secondary request within a message 
queue that was sent by a client in response to an earlier message from 
the old server process.)</p><p class="docText">In
 such a scenario, the only option for the server may be to abandon all 
existing clients, delete the IPC objects created by the previous server 
process, and create new instances of the IPC objects. A newly started 
server handles the possibility that a previous instance of the server 
terminated prematurely by first trying to create an IPC object by 
specifying both the <tt>IPC_CREAT</tt> and the <tt>IPC_EXCL</tt> flags within the <span class="docEmphasis">get</span> call. If the <span class="docEmphasis">get</span>
 call fails because an object with the specified key already exists, 
then the server assumes the object was created by an old server process;
 it therefore uses the <tt>IPC_RMID</tt> <span class="docEmphasis">ctl</span>
 operation to delete the object, and once more performs a get call to 
create the object. (This may be combined with other steps to ensure that
 another server process is not currently running, such as those 
described in Section 55.6.) For a message queue, these steps might 
appear as shown in Example 45-1.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ENJBM">Example 45-1. Cleanup of IPC objects within a server</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>svipc/svmsg_demo_server.c</b>
#include &lt;sys/types.h&gt;
#include &lt;sys/ipc.h&gt;
#include &lt;sys/msg.h&gt;
#include &lt;sys/stat.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

#define KEY_FILE "/some-path/some-file"
                                /* Should be an existing file or one
                                   that this program creates */

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int msqid;
    key_t key;
    const int MQ_PERMS = S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR | S_IWGRP;   /* rw--w---- */

    /* Optional code here to check if another server process is
       already running */

    /* Generate the key for the message queue */

    key = ftok(KEY_FILE, 1);
    if (key == -1)
        errExit("ftok");

    /* While msgget() fails, try creating the queue exclusively */

    while ((msqid = msgget(key, IPC_CREAT | IPC_EXCL | MQ_PERMS)) == -1) {
        if (errno == EEXIST) {          /* MQ with the same key already
                                           exists - remove it and try again */
            msqid = msgget(key, 0);
            if (msqid == -1)
                errExit("msgget() failed to retrieve old queue ID");
            if (msgctl(msqid, IPC_RMID, NULL) == -1)
                errExit("msgget() failed to delete old queue");
            printf("Removed old message queue (id=%d)\n", msqid);

        } else {                        /* Some other error --&gt; give up */
            errExit("msgget() failed");
        }
    }

    /* Upon loop exit, we've successfully created the message queue,
       and we can then carry on to do other work... */

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>svipc/svmsg_demo_server.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">Even
 if a restarted server re-created the IPC objects, there still would be a
 potential problem if supplying the same key to the <span class="docEmphasis">get</span>
 call always generated the same identifier whenever a new IPC object was
 created. Consider the solution just outlined from the point of view of 
the client. If the IPC objects re-created by the server use the same 
identifiers, then the client would have no way of becoming aware that 
the server has been restarted and that the IPC objects don’t contain the
 expected historical information.</p><p class="docText">To
 solve this problem, the kernel employs an algorithm (described in the 
next section) that normally ensures that when a new IPC object is 
created, the object’s identifier will be different, even when the same 
key is supplied. Consequently, any clients of the old server process 
that attempt to use the old identifier will receive an error from the 
relevant IPC system call.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Solutions such as that shown in Example 45-1
 don’t completely solve the problem of identifying a server restart when
 using System V shared memory, since a shared memory object is deleted 
only when all processes have detached it from their virtual address 
space. However, shared memory objects are typically used in conjunction 
with System V semaphores, which <span class="docEmphasis">are</span> immediately deleted in response to an <tt>IPC_RMID</tt>
 operation. This means that a client process will become aware of a 
server restart when it tries to access the deleted semaphore object.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
