<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>45.6. The ipcs and ipcrm Commands</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">45.6. The <span class="docEmphasis">ipcs</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ipcrm</span> Commands</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">ipcs</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ipcrm</span> commands are the System V IPC analogs of the <span class="docEmphasis">ls</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">rm</span> file commands. Using <span class="docEmphasis">ipcs</span>, we can obtain information about IPC objects on the system. By default, <span class="docEmphasis">ipcs</span> displays all objects, as in the following example:</p><pre>$ <b>ipcs</b>

------ Shared Memory Segments --------
key        shmid     owner     perms    bytes    nattch   status
0x6d0731db 262147    mtk       600      8192      2

------ Semaphore Arrays --------
key        semid     owner     perms    nsems
0x6107c0b8 0         cecilia   660      6
0x6107c0b6 32769     britta    660      1

------ Message Queues --------
key        msqid     owner     perms    used-bytes  messages
0x71075958 229376    cecilia   620      12          2</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">On Linux, <span class="docEmphasis">ipcs(1)</span>
 displays information only about IPC objects for which we have read 
permission, regardless of whether we own the objects. On some UNIX 
implementations, <span class="docEmphasis">ipcs</span> shows the same behavior as on Linux. However, on other implementations, <span class="docEmphasis">ipcs</span> displays all objects regardless of whether read permission is granted to the user.</p><p class="docText">By default, for each object, <span class="docEmphasis">ipcs</span>
 displays the key, the identifier, the owner, and the permissions 
(expressed as an octal number), followed by information specific to the 
object:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">For shared memory, <span class="docEmphasis">ipcs</span>
 displays the size of the shared memory region, the number of processes 
that currently have the shared memory region attached to their virtual 
address space, and status flags. The status flags indicate whether the 
region has been locked into RAM to prevent swapping (Section 48.7) and whether the region has been marked to be destroyed when all processes have detached it.</p></li><li><p class="docList">For semaphores, <span class="docEmphasis">ipcs</span> displays the size of the semaphore set.</p></li><li><p class="docList">For message queues, <span class="docEmphasis">ipcs</span> displays the total number of bytes of data and the number of messages in the queue.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">ipcs(1)</span> manual page documents various options for displaying other information about IPC objects.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">ipcrm</span> command deletes an IPC object. The general form of this command is one of the following:</p><pre>$ <b>ipcrm -</b><b><tt><i>X key</i></tt></b>
$ <b>ipcrm -</b><b><tt><i>x id</i></tt></b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In the above, we either specify <span class="docEmphasis">key</span> as an IPC object key or <span class="docEmphasis">id</span> as an IPC object identifier, and the letter <span class="docEmphasis">x</span> is replaced by an uppercase or lowercase <span class="docEmphasis">q</span> (for message queues), <span class="docEmphasis">s</span> (for semaphores), or <span class="docEmphasis">m</span> (for shared memory). Thus, we could use the following command to delete the semaphore set with the identifier 65538:</p><pre>$ <b>ipcrm -s 65538</b></pre><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
