<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>45.7. Obtaining a List of All IPC Objects</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">45.7. Obtaining a List of All IPC Objects</h3><p class="docText">Linux provides two nonstandard methods of obtaining a list of all IPC objects on the system:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">files within the <tt>/proc/sysvipc</tt> directory that list all IPC objects; and</p></li><li><p class="docList">the use of Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">ctl</span> calls.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">We describe the files in <tt>/proc/sysvipc</tt> directory here, and defer discussion of the <span class="docEmphasis">ctl</span> calls until Section 46.6, where we provide an example program that lists all System V message queues on the system.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Some
 other UNIX implementations have their own nonstandard methods of 
obtaining a list of all IPC identifiers; for example, Solaris provides 
the <span class="docEmphasis">msgids()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">semids()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">shmids()</span> system calls for this purpose.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Three read-only files in the <tt>/proc/sysvipc</tt> directory provide the same information as can be obtained via <span class="docEmphasis">ipcs</span>:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><tt>/proc/sysvipc/msg</tt> lists all messages queues and their attributes.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>/proc/sysvipc/sem</tt> lists all semaphore sets and their attributes.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>/proc/sysvipc/shm</tt> lists all shared memory segments and their attributes.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Unlike the <span class="docEmphasis">ipcs</span>
 command, these files always show all objects of the corresponding type,
 regardless of whether read permission is available on the objects.</p><p class="docText">An example of the contents of <tt>/proc/sysvipc/sem</tt> is the following (with some white space removed to fit this example on the page):</p><pre>$ <b>cat /proc/sysvipc/sem</b>
key     semid perms   nsems   uid   gid   cuid  cgid     otime        ctime
  0  16646144   600       4  1000   100   1000   100         0   1010166460</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The three <tt>/proc/sysvipc</tt>
 files provide a (nonportable) method for programs and scripts to walk 
through a list of all of the existing IPC objects of a given type.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The
 best that we can achieve by way of a portable approach to obtaining a 
list of all IPC objects of a given type is to parse the output of <span class="docEmphasis">ipcs(1)</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
