<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>45.9. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">45.9. Summary</h3><p class="docText">System
 V IPC is the name given to three IPC mechanisms that first appeared 
widely in System V, and have subsequently been ported to most UNIX 
implementations and incorporated into various standards. The three IPC 
mechanisms are message queues, which allow processes to exchange 
messages; semaphores, which allow processes to synchronize access to 
shared resources; and shared memory, which allows two or more processes 
to share the same pages of memory.</p><p class="docText">The three IPC mechanisms have many similarities in their APIs and semantics. For each IPC mechanism, a <span class="docEmphasis">get</span> system call creates or opens an object. Given an integer <span class="docEmphasis">key</span>, the <span class="docEmphasis">get</span> calls return an integer <span class="docEmphasis">identifier</span> used to refer to the object in subsequent system calls. Each IPC mechanism also has a corresponding a <span class="docEmphasis">ctl</span>
 call that is used to delete an object and to retrieve and modify 
various attributes (e.g., ownership and permissions) in an object’s 
associated data structure.</p><p class="docText">The
 algorithm used to generate identifiers for new IPC objects is designed 
to minimize the possibility of the same identifier being (immediately) 
reused if an object is deleted, even if the same key is used to create a
 new object. This enables client-server applications to function 
correctly—a restarted server process is able to detect and remove IPC 
objects created by its predecessor, and this action invalidates the 
identifiers held by any clients of the previous server process.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">ipcs</span> command lists the System V IPC objects that currently exist on the system. The <span class="docEmphasis">ipcrm</span> command is used to remove System IPC objects.</p><p class="docText">On Linux, files in the <tt>/proc/sysvipc</tt> directory can be used to obtain information about all of the System V IPC objects on the system.</p><p class="docText">Each
 IPC mechanism has an associated set of limits that can be used to avoid
 exhaustion of system resources by preventing the creation of an 
arbitrary number of IPC objects. Various files under the <tt>/proc/sys/kernel</tt> directory can be used to view and modify these limits.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EXMBM">45.9.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E2MBM">45.9.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">Information
 about the implementation of System V IPC on Linux can be found in 
[Maxwell, 1999] and [Bovet &amp; Cesati, 2005]. [Goodheart &amp; Cox, 
1994] describes the implementation of System V IPC for System V Release 
4.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
