<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 46. System V Message Queues</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0EGMBM">Chapter 46. System V Message Queues</h2><p class="docText">This
 chapter describes System V message queues. Message queues allow 
processes to exchange data in the form of messages. Although message 
queues are similar to pipes and FIFOs in some respects, they also differ
 in important ways:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The handle used to refer to a message queue is the identifier returned by a call to <span class="docEmphasis">msgget()</span>. These identifiers are not the same as the file descriptors used for most other forms of I/O on UNIX systems.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Communication
 via message queues is message-oriented; that is, the reader receives 
whole messages, as written by the writer. It is not possible to read 
part of a message, leaving the remainder in the queue, or to read 
multiple messages at a time. This contrasts with pipes, which provide an
 undifferentiated stream of bytes (i.e., with pipes, the reader can read
 an arbitrary number of bytes at a time, irrespective of the size of 
data blocks written by the writer).</p></li><li><p class="docList">In addition to containing data, each message has an integer <span class="docEmphasis">type</span>. Messages can be retrieved from a queue in first-in, first-out order or retrieved by type.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">At the end of this chapter (Section 46.9),
 we summarize a number of limitations of System V message queues. These 
limitations lead us to the conclusion that, where possible, new 
applications should avoid the use of System V message queues in favor of
 other IPC mechanisms such as FIFOs, POSIX message queues, and sockets. 
However, when message queues were initially devised, these alternative 
mechanisms were unavailable or were not widespread across UNIX 
implementations. Consequently, there are various existing applications 
that employ message queues, and this fact forms one of the primary 
motivations for describing them.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
