<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>46.4. Message Queue Associated Data Structure</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">46.4. Message Queue Associated Data Structure</h3><p class="docText">Each message queue has an associated <span class="docEmphasis">msqid_ds</span> data structure of the following form:</p><pre>struct msqid_ds {
    struct ipc_perm msg_perm;           /* Ownership and permissions */
    time_t          msg_stime;          /* Time of last msgsnd() */
    time_t          msg_rtime;          /* Time of last msgrcv() */
    time_t          msg_ctime;          /* Time of last change */
    unsigned long   __msg_cbytes;       /* Number of bytes in queue */
    msgqnum_t       msg_qnum;           /* Number of messages in queue */
    msglen_t        msg_qbytes;         /* Maximum bytes in queue */
    pid_t           msg_lspid;          /* PID of last msgsnd() */
    pid_t           msg_lrpid;          /* PID of last msgrcv() */
};</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The purpose of the abbreviated spelling <span class="docEmphasis">msq</span> in the name <span class="docEmphasis">msqid_ds</span> is to confuse the programmer. This is the only message queue interface employing this spelling.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">msgqnum_t</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">msglen_t</span> data types—used to type the <span class="docEmphasis">msg_qnum</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">msg_qbytes</span> fields—are unsigned integer types specified in SUSv3.</p><p class="docText">The fields of the <span class="docEmphasis">msqid_ds</span>
 structure are implicitly updated by the various message queue system 
calls, and certain fields can be explicitly updated using the <span class="docEmphasis">msgctl()</span> <tt>IPC_SET</tt> operation. The details are as follows:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">msg_perm</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">When the message queue is created, the fields of this substructure are initialized as described in Section 45.3. The <span class="docEmphasis">uid</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">gid</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> subfields can be updated via <tt>IPC_SET</tt>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">msg_stime</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">When the queue is created, this field is set to 0; each later successful <span class="docEmphasis">msgsnd()</span> sets this field to the current time. This field and the other timestamp fields in the <span class="docEmphasis">msqid_ds</span> structure are typed as <span class="docEmphasis">time_t</span>; they store time in seconds since the Epoch.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">msg_rtime</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This field is set to 0 when the message queue is created, and then set to the current time on each successful <span class="docEmphasis">msgrcv()</span>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">msg_ctime</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This field is set to the current time when the message queue is created and whenever an <tt>IPC_SET</tt> operation is successfully performed.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">__msg_cbytes</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This field is set to 0 when the message queue is created, and then adjusted during each successful <span class="docEmphasis">msgsnd()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">msgrcv()</span> to reflect the total number of bytes contained in the <span class="docEmphasis">mtext</span> fields of all messages in the queue.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">msg_qnum</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">When the message queue is created, this field is set to 0. It is then incremented by each successful <span class="docEmphasis">msgsnd()</span> and decremented by each successful <span class="docEmphasis">msgrcv()</span> to reflect the total number of messages in the queue.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">msg_qbytes</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The value in this field defines an upper limit on the number of bytes in the <span class="docEmphasis">mtext</span> fields of all messages in the message queue. This field is initialized to the value of the <tt>MSGMNB</tt> limit when the queue is created. A privileged (<tt>CAP_SYS_RESOURCE</tt>) process can use the <tt>IPC_SET</tt> operation to adjust <span class="docEmphasis">msg_qbytes</span> to any value in the range 0 to <tt>INT_MAX</tt> (2,147,483,647 on 32-bit platforms) bytes. An unprivileged process can adjust <span class="docEmphasis">msg_qbytes</span> to any value in the range 0 to <tt>MSGMNB</tt>. A privileged user can modify the value contained in the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/sys/kernel/msgmnb</tt> file in order to change the initial <span class="docEmphasis">msg_qbytes</span> setting for all subsequently created message queues, as well as the upper limit for subsequent changes to <span class="docEmphasis">msg_qbytes</span> by unprivileged processes. We say more about message queue limits in Section 46.5.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">msg_lspid</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This field is set to 0 when the queue is created, and then set to the process ID of the calling process on each successful <span class="docEmphasis">msgsnd()</span>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">msg_lrpid</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This
 field is set to 0 when the message queue is created, and then set to 
the process ID of the calling process on each successful <span class="docEmphasis">msgrcv()</span>.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">All of the above fields are specified by SUSv3, with the exception of __<span class="docEmphasis">msg_cbytes</span>. Nevertheless, most UNIX implementations provide an equivalent of the __<span class="docEmphasis">msg_cbytes</span> field.</p><p class="docText">The program in Example 46-5 demonstrates the use of the <tt>IPC_STAT</tt> and <tt>IPC_SET</tt> operations to modify the <span class="docEmphasis">msg_qbytes</span> setting of a message queue.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EQ2BM">Example 46-5. Changing the <span class="docEmphasis">msg_qbytes</span> setting of a System V message queue</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>svmsg/svmsg_chqbytes.c</b>
#include &lt;sys/types.h&gt;
#include &lt;sys/msg.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    struct msqid_ds ds;
    int msqid;
    if (argc != 3 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s msqid max-bytes\n", argv[0]);

    /* Retrieve copy of associated data structure from kernel */

    msqid = getInt(argv[1], 0, "msqid");
    if (msgctl(msqid, IPC_STAT, &amp;ds) == -1)
        errExit("msgctl");

    ds.msg_qbytes = getInt(argv[2], 0, "max-bytes");

    /* Update associated data structure in kernel */

    if (msgctl(msqid, IPC_SET, &amp;ds) == -1)
        errExit("msgctl");

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
      <b>svmsg/svmsg_chqbytes.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
