<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>46.5. Message Queue Limits</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">46.5. Message Queue Limits</h3><p class="docText">Most
 UNIX implementations impose various limits on the operation of System V
 message queues. Here, we describe the limits under Linux and note a few
 differences from other UNIX implementations.</p><p class="docText">The
 following limits are enforced on Linux. The system call affected by the
 limit and the error that results if the limit is reached are noted in 
parentheses.</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MSGMNI</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is a system-wide limit on the number of message queue identifiers (in other words, message queues) that can be created. (<span class="docEmphasis">msgget()</span>, <tt>ENOSPC</tt>)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MSGMAX</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is a system-wide limit specifying the maximum number of (<span class="docEmphasis">mtext</span>) bytes that can be written in a single message. (<span class="docEmphasis">msgsnd()</span>, <tt>EINVAL</tt>)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MSGMNB</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is the maximum number of (<span class="docEmphasis">mtext</span>) bytes that can be held in a message queue at one time. This limit is a system-wide parameter that is used to initialize the <span class="docEmphasis">msg_qbytes</span> field of the <span class="docEmphasis">msqid_ds</span> data structure associated with this message queue. Subsequently, the <span class="docEmphasis">msg_qbytes</span> value can be modified on a per-queue basis, as described in Section 46.4. If a queue’s <span class="docEmphasis">msg_qbytes</span> limit is reached, then <span class="docEmphasis">msgsnd()</span> blocks, or fails with the error <tt>EAGAIN</tt> if <tt>IPC_NOWAIT</tt> was set.</p><p class="docList">Some UNIX implementations also define the following further limits:</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MSGTQL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is a system-wide limit on the number of messages that can be placed on all message queues on the system.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MSGPOOL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is a system-wide limit on the size of the buffer pool that is used to hold data in all message queues on the system.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">Although
 Linux doesn’t impose either of the above limits, it does limit the 
number of messages on an individual queue to the value specified by the 
queue’s <span class="docEmphasis">msg_qbytes</span>
 setting. This limitation is relevant only if we are writing zero-length
 messages to a queue. It has the effect that the limit on the number of 
zero-length messages is the same as the limit on the number of 1-byte 
messages that can be written to the queue. This is necessary to prevent 
an infinite number of zero-length messages being written to the queue. 
Although they contain no data, each zero-length message consumes a small
 amount of memory for system bookkeeping overhead.</p><p class="docText">At
 system startup, the message queue limits are set to default values. 
These defaults have varied somewhat across kernel versions. (Some 
distributors’ kernels set different defaults from those provided by 
vanilla kernels.) On Linux, the limits can be viewed or changed via 
files in the <tt>/proc</tt> file system. Table 46-1 shows the <tt>/proc</tt> file corresponding to each limit. As an example, here are the default limits that we see for Linux 2.6.31 on one x86-32 system:</p><pre>$ <b>cd /proc/sys/kernel</b>
$ <b>cat msgmni</b>
748
$ <b>cat msgmax</b>
8192
$ <b>cat msgmnb</b>
16384</pre><br/>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 46-1. System V message queue limits</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Limit</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Ceiling value (x86-32)</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Corresponding file in <tt>/proc/sys/kernel</tt></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MSGMNI</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">32768 (<tt>IPCMNI</tt>)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>msgmni</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MSGMAX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Depends on available memory</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>msgmax</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MSGMNB</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">2147483647 (<tt>INT_MAX</tt>)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>msgmnb</tt></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">The ceiling value column of Table 46-1 shows the maximum value to which each limit can be raised on the x86-32 architecture. Note that although the <tt>MSGMNB</tt> limit can be raised to the value <tt>INT_MAX</tt>, some other limit (e.g., lack of memory) will be reached before a message queue can be loaded with so much data.</p><p class="docText">The Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">msgctl()</span> <tt>IPC_INFO</tt> operation retrieves a structure of type <span class="docEmphasis">msginfo</span>, which contains the values of the various message queue limits:</p><pre>struct msginfo buf;

msgctl(0, IPC_INFO, (struct msqid_ds *) &amp;buf);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Details about <tt>IPC_INFO</tt> and the <span class="docEmphasis">msginfo</span> structure can be found in the <span class="docEmphasis">msgctl(2)</span> manual page.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
