<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>46.9. Disadvantages of System V Message Queues</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">46.9. Disadvantages of System V Message Queues</h3><p class="docText">UNIX
 systems provide a number of mechanisms for transmitting data from one 
process to another on the same system, either in the form of an 
undelimited byte stream (pipes, FIFOs, and UNIX domain stream sockets) 
or as delimited messages (System V message queues, POSIX message queues,
 and UNIX domain datagram sockets).</p><p class="docText">A
 distinctive feature of System V message queues is the ability to attach
 a numeric type to each message. This provides for two possibilities 
that may be useful to applications: reading processes may select 
messages by type, or they may employ a priority-queue strategy so that 
higher-priority messages (i.e., those with lower message type values) 
are read first.</p><p class="docText">However, System V message queues have a number of disadvantages:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Message
 queues are referred to by identifiers, rather than the file descriptors
 used by most other UNIX I/O mechanisms. This means that a variety of 
file descriptor–based I/O techniques described in Chapter 63 (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>)
 can’t be applied to message queues. Furthermore, writing programs that 
simultaneously handle inputs from both message queues and file 
descriptor-based I/O mechanisms requires code that is more complex than 
code that deals with file descriptors alone. (We look at one way of 
combining the two I/O models in Exercise 63-3.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">The
 use of keys, rather than filenames, to identify message queues results 
in additional programming complexity and also requires the use of <span class="docEmphasis">ipcs</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ipcrm</span> instead of <span class="docEmphasis">ls</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">rm</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">ftok()</span> function usually generates a unique key, but it is not guaranteed to do so. Employing the <tt>IPC_PRIVATE</tt>
 key guarantees a unique queue identifier, but leaves us with the task 
of making that identifier visible to other processes that require it.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Message
 queues are connectionless, and the kernel doesn’t maintain a count of 
the number of processes referring to the queue as is done with pipes, 
FIFOs, and sockets. Consequently, it can be difficult to answer the 
following questions:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">When
 is it safe for an application to delete a message queue? (Premature 
deletion of the queue results in immediate loss of data, regardless of 
whether any process might later be interested in reading from the 
queue.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">How can an application ensure that an unused queue is deleted?</p></li></ul></li><li><p class="docList">There
 are limits on the total number of message queues, the size of messages,
 and the capacity of individual queues. These limits are configurable, 
but if an application operates outside the range of the default limits, 
this requires extra work when installing the application.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">In
 summary, System V message queues are often best avoided. In situations 
where we require the facility to select messages by type, we should 
consider alternatives. POSIX message queues (Chapter 52)
 are one such alternative. As a further alternative, solutions involving
 multiple file descriptor–based communication channels may provide 
functionality similar to selecting messages by type, while at the same 
time allowing the use of the alternative I/O models described in Chapter 63.
 For example, if we need to transmit “normal” and “priority” messages, 
we could use a pair of FIFOs or UNIX domain sockets for the two message 
types, and then employ <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> to monitor file descriptors for both channels.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
