<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>46.11. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">46.11. Exercises</h3><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Experiment with the programs in Example 46-1 (<tt>svmsg_create.c</tt>), Example 46-2 (<tt>svmsg_send.c</tt>), and Example 46-3 (<tt>svmsg_receive.c</tt>) to confirm your understanding of the <span class="docEmphasis">msgget()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">msgsnd()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">msgrcv()</span> system calls.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Recode the sequence-number client-server application of Section 44.8
 to use System V message queues. Use a single message queue to transmit 
messages from both client to server and server to client. Employ the 
conventions for message types described in Section 46.8.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">In the client-server application of Section 46.8, why does the client pass the identifier of its message queue in the body of the message (in the <span class="docEmphasis">clientId</span> field), rather than in the message type (<span class="docEmphasis">mtype</span>)?</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Make the following changes to the client-server application of Section 46.8:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Replace the use of a hard-coded message queue key with code in the server that uses <tt>IPC_PRIVATE</tt>
 to generate a unique identifier, and then writes this identifier to a 
well-known file. The client must read the identifier from this file. The
 server should remove this file if it terminates.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">In the <span class="docEmphasis">serveRequest()</span> function of the server program, system call errors are not diagnosed. Add code that logs errors using <span class="docEmphasis">syslog()</span> (Section 37.5).</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Add code to the server so that it becomes a daemon on startup (Section 37.2).</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">In the server, add a handler for <tt>SIGTERM</tt> and <tt>SIGINT</tt>
 that performs a tidy exit. The handler should remove the message queue 
and (if the earlier part of this exercise was implemented) the file 
created to hold the server’s message queue identifier. Include code in 
the handler to terminate the server by disestablishing the handler, and 
then once more raising the same signal that invoked the handler (see Section 26.1.4 for the rationale and steps required for this task).</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The
 server child doesn’t handle the possibility that the client may 
terminate prematurely, in which case the server child would fill the 
client’s message queue, and then block indefinitely. Modify the server 
to handle this possibility by establishing a timeout when calling <span class="docEmphasis">msgsnd()</span>,
 as described in Section 23.3. If the server child deems that the client
 has disappeared, it should attempt to delete the client’s message 
queue, and then exit (after perhaps logging a message via <span class="docEmphasis">syslog()</span>).</p></div></li></ol></div></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The client shown in Example 46-9 (<tt>svmsg_file_client.c</tt>)
 doesn’t handle various possibilities for failure in the server. In 
particular, if the server message queue fills up (perhaps because the 
server terminated and the queue was filled by other clients), then the <span class="docEmphasis">msgsnd()</span> call will block indefinitely. Similarly, if the server fails to send a response to the client, then the <span class="docEmphasis">msgrcv()</span> call will block indefinitely. Add code to the client that sets timeouts (Section 23.3) on these calls. If either call times out, then the program should report an error to the user and terminate.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write a simple chat application (similar to <span class="docEmphasis">talk(1)</span>, but without the <span class="docEmphasis">curses</span> interface) using System V messages queues. Use a single message queue for each client.</p></div></li></ol></div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
