<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>47.1. Overview</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">47.1. Overview</h3><p class="docText">The general steps for using a System V semaphore are the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Create or open a semaphore set using <span class="docEmphasis">semget()</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Initialize the semaphores in the set using the <span class="docEmphasis">semctl()</span> <tt>SETVAL</tt> or <tt>SETALL</tt> operation. (Only one process should do this.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">Perform operations on semaphore values using <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span>. The processes using the semaphore typically use these operations to indicate acquisition and release of a shared resource.</p></li><li><p class="docList">When all processes have finished using the semaphore set, remove the set using the <span class="docEmphasis">semctl()</span> <tt>IPC_RMID</tt> operation. (Only one process should do this.)</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Most
 operating systems provide some type of semaphore primitive for use in 
application programs. However, System V semaphores are rendered 
unusually complex by the fact that they are allocated in groups called <span class="docEmphasis">semaphore sets</span>. The number of semaphores in a set is specified when the set is created using the <span class="docEmphasis">semget()</span> system call. While it is common to operate on a single semaphore at a time, the <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> system call allows us to atomically perform a group of operations on multiple semaphores in the same set.</p><p class="docText">Because
 System V semaphores are created and initialized in separate steps, race
 conditions can result if two processes try to perform these steps at 
the same time. Describing this race condition and how to avoid it 
requires that we describe <span class="docEmphasis">semctl()</span> before describing <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span>,
 which means that there is quite a lot of material to cover before we 
have all of the details required to fully understand semaphores.</p><p class="docText">In the meantime, we provide Example 47-1 as a simple example of the use of the various semaphore system calls. This program operates in two modes:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Given
 a single integer command-line argument, the program creates a new 
semaphore set containing a single semaphore, and initializes the 
semaphore to the value supplied in the command-line argument. The 
program displays the identifier of the new semaphore set.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Given
 two command-line arguments, the program interprets them as (in order) 
the identifier of an existing semaphore set and a value to be added to 
the first semaphore (numbered 0) in that set. The program carries out 
the specified operation on that semaphore. To enable us to monitor the 
semaphore operation, the program prints messages before and after the 
operation. Each of these messages begins with the process ID, so that we
 can distinguish the output of multiple instances of the program.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The following shell session log demonstrates the use of the program in Example 47-1. We begin by creating a semaphore that is initialized to 0:</p><pre>$ <b>./svsem_demo 0 </b>
Semaphore ID = 98307                    <i> ID of new semaphore set</i></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We then execute a background command that tries to decrease the semaphore value by 2:</p><pre>$ <b>./svsem_demo 98307 -2 &amp;</b>
23338: about to semop at  10:19:42
[1] 23338</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This command blocked, 
because the value of the semaphore can’t be decreased below 0. Now, we 
execute a command that adds 3 to the semaphore value:</p><pre>$ <b>./svsem_demo 98307 +3</b>
23339: about to semop at  10:19:55
23339: semop completed at 10:19:55
23338: semop completed at 10:19:55
[1]+  Done              ./svsem_demo 98307 -2</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The semaphore increment 
operation succeeded immediately, and caused the semaphore decrement 
operation in the background command to proceed, since that operation 
could now be performed without leaving the semaphore’s value below 0.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EZ5BM">Example 47-1. Creating and operating on System V semaphores</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>svsem/svsem_demo.c</b>
#include &lt;sys/types.h&gt;
#include &lt;sys/sem.h&gt;
#include &lt;sys/stat.h&gt;
#include "curr_time.h"                  /* Declaration of currTime() */
#include "semun.h"                      /* Definition of semun union */
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int semid;

    if (argc &lt; 2 || argc &gt; 3 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s init-value\n"
                 "   or: %s semid operation\n", argv[0], argv[0]);

    if (argc == 2) {            /* Create and initialize semaphore */
        union semun arg;

        semid = semget(IPC_PRIVATE, 1, S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR);
        if (semid == -1)
            errExit("semid");

        arg.val = getInt(argv[1], 0, "init-value");
        if (semctl(semid, /* semnum= */ 0, SETVAL, arg) == -1)
            errExit("semctl");

        printf("Semaphore ID = %d\n", semid);

    } else {                    /* Perform an operation on first semaphore */

        struct sembuf sop;              /* Structure defining operation */

        semid = getInt(argv[1], 0, "semid");

        sop.sem_num = 0;                /* Specifies first semaphore in set */
        sop.sem_op = getInt(argv[2], 0, "operation");
                                        /* Add, subtract, or wait for 0 */
        sop.sem_flg = 0;                /* No special options for operation */

        printf("%ld: about to semop at  %s\n", (long) getpid(), currTime("%T"));
        if (semop(semid, &amp;sop, 1) == -1)
            errExit("semop");

        printf("%ld: semop completed at %s\n", (long) getpid(), currTime("%T"));
    }

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>svsem/svsem_demo.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
