<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>47.2. Creating or Opening a Semaphore Set</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">47.2. Creating or Opening a Semaphore Set</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">semget()</span> system call creates a new semaphore set or obtains the identifier of an existing set.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/types.h&gt;        /* For portability */
#include &lt;sys/sem.h&gt;

int <b>semget</b>(key_t <span class="docEmphasis">key</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">nsems</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">semflg</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns semaphore set identifier on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">key</span> argument is a key generated using one of the methods described in Section 45.2 (i.e., usually the value <tt>IPC_PRIVATE</tt> or a key returned by <span class="docEmphasis">ftok()</span>).</p><p class="docText">If we are using <span class="docEmphasis">semget()</span> to create a new semaphore set, then <span class="docEmphasis">nsems</span> specifies the number of semaphores in that set, and must be greater than 0. If we are using <span class="docEmphasis">semget()</span> to obtain the identifier of an existing set, then <span class="docEmphasis">nsems</span> must be less than or equal to the size of the set (or the error <tt>EINVAL</tt> results). It is not possible to change the number of semaphores in an existing set.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">semflg</span>
 argument is a bit mask specifying the permissions to be placed on a new
 semaphore set or checked against an existing set. These permissions are
 specified in the same manner as for files (Table 15-4, in Section 15.4.1). In addition, zero or more of the following flags can be ORed (|) in <span class="docEmphasis">semflg</span> to control the operation of <span class="docEmphasis">semget()</span>:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">IPC_CREAT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">If no semaphore set with the specified <span class="docEmphasis">key</span> exists, create a new set.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">IPC_EXCL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">If <tt>IPC_CREAT</tt> was also specified, and a semaphore set with the specified <span class="docEmphasis">key</span> already exists, fail with the error <tt>EEXIST</tt>.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">These flags are described in more detail in Section 45.1.</p><p class="docText">On success, <span class="docEmphasis">semget()</span>
 returns the identifier for the new or existing semaphore set. 
Subsequent system calls referring to individual semaphores must specify 
both the semaphore set identifier and the number of the semaphore within
 that set. The semaphores within a set are numbered starting at 0.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
