<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>47.3. Semaphore Control Operations</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">47.3. Semaphore Control Operations</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">semctl()</span> system call performs a variety of control operations on a semaphore set or on an individual semaphore within a set.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/types.h&gt;        /* For portability */
#include &lt;sys/sem.h&gt;

int <b>semctl</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">semid</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">semnum</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">cmd</span>, ... /* union semun <span class="docEmphasis">arg</span> */);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns nonnegative integer on success (see text); returns -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">semid</span>
 argument is the identifier of the semaphore set on which the operation 
is to be performed. For those operations performed on a single 
semaphore, the <span class="docEmphasis">semnum</span>
 argument identifies a particular semaphore within the set. For other 
operations, this argument is ignored, and we can specify it as 0. The 
cmd argument specifies the operation to be performed.</p><p class="docText">Certain operations require a fourth argument to <span class="docEmphasis">semctl()</span>, which we refer to by the name <span class="docEmphasis">arg</span> in the remainder of this section. This argument is a union defined as shown in Example 47-2. We must explicitly define this union in our programs. We do this in our example programs by including the header file in Example 47-2.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Although placing the definition of the <span class="docEmphasis">semun</span>
 union in a standard header file would be sensible, SUSv3 requires the 
programmer to explicitly define it instead. Nevertheless, some UNIX 
implementations do provide this definition in <tt>&lt;sys/sem.h&gt;</tt>. Older versions of <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> (up to and including version 2.0) also provided this definition. In conformance with SUSv3, more recent versions of <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> do not, and the macro <tt>_SEM_SEMUN_UNDEFINED</tt> is defined with the value 1 in <tt>&lt;sys/sem.h&gt;</tt> to indicate this fact (i.e., an application compiled against <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> can test this macro to determine if the program must itself define the <span class="docEmphasis">semun</span> union).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ELCCM">Example 47-2. Definition of the <span class="docEmphasis">semun</span> union</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre><b>svsem/semun.h</b>
#ifndef SEMUN_H
#define SEMUN_H                 /* Prevent accidental double inclusion */

#include &lt;sys/types.h&gt;          /* For portability */
#include &lt;sys/sem.h&gt;

union semun {                   /* Used in calls to semctl() */
    int                 val;
    struct semid_ds *   buf;
    unsigned short *    array;
#if defined(__linux__)
    struct seminfo *    __buf;
#endif
};

#endif
      <b>svsem/semun.h</b></pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">SUSv2 and SUSv3 specify that the final argument to <span class="docEmphasis">semctl()</span> is optional. However, a few (mainly older) UNIX implementations (and older versions of <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>) prototyped <span class="docEmphasis">semctl()</span> as follows:</p><pre>int semctl(int semid, int semnum, int cmd, union semun arg);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This meant that the fourth argument was required even in the cases where it is not actually used (e.g., the <tt>IPC_RMID</tt> and <tt>GETVAL</tt> operations described below). For full portability, we specify a dummy final argument to <span class="docEmphasis">semctl()</span> in those calls where it is not required.</p><p class="docText">In the remainder of this section, we consider the various control operations that can be specified for <span class="docEmphasis">cmd</span>.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESDCM">47.3.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EWDCM">47.3.1.1. Generic control operations</h5><p class="docText">The following operations are the same ones that can be applied to other types of System V IPC objects. In each case, the <span class="docEmphasis">semnum</span>
 argument is ignored. Further details about these operations, including 
the privileges and permissions required by the calling process, are 
provided in Section 45.3.</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">IPC_RMID</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Immediately remove the semaphore set and its associated <span class="docEmphasis">semid_ds</span> data structure. Any processes blocked in <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> calls waiting on semaphores in this set are immediately awakened, with <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> reporting the error <tt>EIDRM</tt>. The <span class="docEmphasis">arg</span> argument is not required.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">IPC_STAT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Place a copy of the <span class="docEmphasis">semid_ds</span> data structure associated with this semaphore set in the buffer pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">arg.buf</span>. We describe the <span class="docEmphasis">semid_ds</span> structure in Section 47.4.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">IPC_SET</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Update selected fields of the <span class="docEmphasis">semid_ds</span> data structure associated with this semaphore set using values in the buffer pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">arg.buf</span>.</p></dd></dl><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EUFCM">47.3.1.2. Retrieving and initializing semaphore values</h5><p class="docText">The
 following operations retrieve or initialize the value(s) of an 
individual semaphore or of all semaphores in a set. Retrieving a 
semaphore value requires read permission on the semaphore, while 
initializing the value requires alter (write) permission.</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">GETVAL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">As its function result, <span class="docEmphasis">semctl()</span> returns the value of the <span class="docEmphasis">semnum</span>-th semaphore in the semaphore set specified by <span class="docEmphasis">semid</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">arg</span> argument is not required.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SETVAL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The value of the <span class="docEmphasis">semnum</span>-th semaphore in the set referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">semid</span> is initialized to the value specified in <span class="docEmphasis">arg.val</span>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">GETALL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Retrieve the values of all of the semaphores in the set referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">semid</span>, placing them in the array pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">arg.array</span>. The programmer must ensure that this array is of sufficient size. (The number of semaphores in a set can be obtained from the <span class="docEmphasis">sem_nsems</span> field of the <span class="docEmphasis">semid_ds</span> data structure retrieved by an <tt>IPC_STAT</tt> operation.) The <span class="docEmphasis">semnum</span> argument is ignored. An example of the use of the <tt>GETALL</tt> operation is provided in Example 47-3.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SETALL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Initialize all semaphores in the set referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">semid</span>, using the values supplied in the array pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">arg.array</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">semnum</span> argument is ignored. Example 47-4 demonstrates the use of the <tt>SETALL</tt> operation.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">If another process is waiting to perform an operation on the semaphore(s) modified by the <tt>SETVAL</tt> or <tt>SETALL</tt> operations, and the change(s) made would permit that operation to proceed, then the kernel wakes up that process.</p><p class="docText">Changing the value of a semaphore with <tt>SETVAL</tt> or <tt>SETALL</tt> clears the undo entries for that semaphore in all processes. We describe semaphore undo entries in Section 47.8.</p><p class="docText">Note that the information returned by <tt>GETVAL</tt> and <tt>GETALL</tt>
 may already be out of date by the time the calling process comes to use
 it. Any program that depends on the information returned by these 
operations being unchanged may be subject to time-of-check, time-of-use 
race conditions (Section 38.6).</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EHLCM">47.3.1.3. Retrieving per-semaphore information</h5><p class="docText">The following operations return (via the function result value) information about the <span class="docEmphasis">semnum</span>-th semaphore of the set referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">semid</span>. For all of these operations, read permission is required on the semaphore set, and the <span class="docEmphasis">arg</span> argument is not required.</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">GETPID</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Return the process ID of the last process to perform a <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> on this semaphore; this is referred to as the <span class="docEmphasis">sempid</span> value. If no process has yet performed a <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> on this semaphore, 0 is returned.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">GETNCNT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Return the number of processes currently waiting for the value of this semaphore to increase; this is referred to as the <span class="docEmphasis">semncnt</span> value.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">GETZCNT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Return the number of processes currently waiting for the value of this semaphore to become 0; this is referred to as the <span class="docEmphasis">semzcnt</span> value.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">As with the <tt>GETVAL</tt> and <tt>GETALL</tt> operations described above, the information returned by the <tt>GETPID</tt>, <tt>GETNCNT</tt>, and <tt>GETZCNT</tt> operations may already be out of date by the time the calling process comes to use it.</p><p class="docText">Example 47-3 demonstrates the use of these three operations.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
