<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>47.6. Semaphore Operations</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">47.6. Semaphore Operations</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> system call performs one or more operations on the semaphores in the semaphore set identified by <span class="docEmphasis">semid</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/types.h&gt;        /* For portability */
#include &lt;sys/sem.h&gt;

int <b>semop</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">semid</span>, struct sembuf *<span class="docEmphasis">sops</span>, unsigned int <span class="docEmphasis">nsops</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sops</span> argument is a pointer to an array that contains the operations to be performed, and <span class="docEmphasis">nsops</span>
 gives the size of this array (which must contain at least one element).
 The operations are performed atomically and in array order. The 
elements of the <span class="docEmphasis">sops</span> array are structures of the following form:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">struct sembuf {
    unsigned short sem_num;     /* Semaphore number */
    short          sem_op;      /* Operation to be performed */
    short          sem_flg;     /* Operation flags (IPC_NOWAIT and SEM_UNDO) */
};

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sem_num</span> field identifies the semaphore within the set upon which the operation is to be performed. The <span class="docEmphasis">sem_op</span> field specifies the operation to be performed:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">If <span class="docEmphasis">sem_op</span> is greater than 0, the value of <span class="docEmphasis">sem_op</span>
 is added to the semaphore value. As a result, other processes waiting 
to decrease the semaphore value may be awakened and perform their 
operations. The calling process must have alter (write) permission on 
the semaphore.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If <span class="docEmphasis">sem_op</span>
 equals 0, the value of the semaphore is checked to see whether it 
currently equals 0. If it does, the operation completes immediately; 
otherwise, <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> blocks until the semaphore value becomes 0. The calling process must have read permission on the semaphore.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If <span class="docEmphasis">sem_op</span> is less than 0, decrease the value of the semaphore by the amount specified in <span class="docEmphasis">sem_op</span>. If the current value of the semaphore is greater than or equal to the absolute value of <span class="docEmphasis">sem_op</span>, the operation completes immediately. Otherwise, <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span>
 blocks until the semaphore value has been increased to a level that 
permits the operation to be performed without resulting in a negative 
value. The calling process must have alter permission on the semaphore.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Semantically,
 increasing the value of a semaphore corresponds to making a resource 
available so that others can use it, while decreasing the value of a 
semaphore corresponds to reserving a resource for (exclusive) use by 
this process. When decreasing the value of a semaphore, the operation is
 blocked if the semaphore value is too low—that is, if some other 
process has already reserved the resource.</p><p class="docText">When a <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> call blocks, the process remains blocked until one of the following occurs:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Another process modifies the value of the semaphore such that the requested operation can proceed.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A signal interrupts the <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> call. In this case, the error <tt>EINTR</tt> results. (As noted in Section 21.5, <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> is never automatically restarted after being interrupted by a signal handler.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">Another process deletes the semaphore referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">semid</span>. In this case, <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> fails with the error <tt>EIDRM</tt>.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">We can prevent <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> from blocking when performing an operation on a particular semaphore by specifying the <tt>IPC_NOWAIT</tt> flag in the corresponding <span class="docEmphasis">sem_flg</span> field. In this case, if <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> would have blocked, it instead fails with the error <tt>EAGAIN</tt>.</p><p class="docText">While it is usual to operate on a single semaphore at a time, it is possible to make a <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span>
 call that performs operations on multiple semaphores in a set. The key 
point to note is that this group of operations is performed atomically; 
that is, <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span>
 either performs all of the operations immediately, if possible, or 
blocks until it would be possible to perform all of the operations 
simultaneously.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Few systems document the fact that <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span>
 performs operations in array order, although all systems known to the 
author do so, and a few applications depend on this behavior. SUSv4 adds
 text that explicitly requires this behavior.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Example 47-7 demonstrates the use of <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span>
 to perform operations on three semaphores in a set. The operations on 
semaphores 0 and 2 may not be able to proceed immediately, depending on 
the current values of the semaphores. If the operation on semaphore 0 
can’t be performed immediately, then none of the requested operations is
 performed, and <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span>
 blocks. On the other hand, if the operation on semaphore 0 could be 
performed immediately, but the operation on semaphore 2 could not, 
then—because the <tt>IPC_NOWAIT</tt> flag was specified—none of the requested operations is performed, and <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> returns immediately with the error <tt>EAGAIN</tt>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">semtimedop()</span> system call performs the same task as <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span>, except that the <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> argument specifies an upper limit on the time for which the call will block.</p><pre>#define _GNU_SOURCE
#include &lt;sys/types.h&gt;        /* For portability */
#include &lt;sys/sem.h&gt;

int <b>semtimedop</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">semid</span>, struct sembuf *<span class="docEmphasis">sops</span>, unsigned int <span class="docEmphasis">nsops</span>,
               struct timespec *<span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> argument is a pointer to a <span class="docEmphasis">timespec</span> structure (Section 23.4.2),
 which allows a time interval to be expressed as a number of seconds and
 nanoseconds. If the specified time interval expires before it is 
possible to complete the semaphore operation, <span class="docEmphasis">semtimedop()</span> fails with the error <tt>EAGAIN</tt>. If <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> is specified as <tt>NULL</tt>, <span class="docEmphasis">semtimedop()</span> is exactly the same as <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">semtimedop()</span> system call is provided as a more efficient method of setting a timeout on a semaphore operation than using <span class="docEmphasis">setitimer()</span> plus <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span>.
 The small performance benefit that this confers is significant for 
certain applications (notably, some database systems) that need to 
frequently perform such operations. However, <span class="docEmphasis">semtimedop()</span> is not specified in SUSv3 and is present on only a few other UNIX implementations.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">semtimedop()</span>
 system call appeared as a new feature in Linux 2.6 and was subsequently
 back-ported into Linux 2.4, starting with kernel 2.4.22.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EBMCM">Example 47-7. Using <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> to perform operations on multiple System V semaphores</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedWidth">struct sembuf sops[3];

   sops[0].sem_num = 0;                 /* Subtract 1 from semaphore 0 */
   sops[0].sem_op = -1;
   sops[0].sem_flg = 0;

   sops[1].sem_num = 1;                 /* Add 2 to semaphore 1 */
   sops[1].sem_op = 2;
   sops[1].sem_flg = 0;

   sops[2].sem_num = 2;                 /* Wait for semaphore 2 to equal 0 */
   sops[2].sem_op = 0;
   sops[2].sem_flg = IPC_NOWAIT;        /* But don't block if operation
                                           can't be performed immediately */
   if (semop(semid, sops, 3) == -1) {
       if (errno == EAGAIN)             /* Semaphore 2 would have blocked */
           printf("Operation would have blocked\n");
       else
           errExit("semop");            /* Some other error */
   }

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKMCM">47.6.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EOMCM">47.6.1.1. Example program</h5><p class="docText">The program in Example 47-8 provides a command-line interface to the <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span>
 system call. The first argument to this program is the identifier of 
the semaphore set upon which operations are to be performed.</p><p class="docText">Each of the remaining command-line arguments specifies a group of semaphore operations to be performed in a single <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span>
 call. The operations within a single command-line argument are 
delimited by commas. Each operation has one of the following forms:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">semnum</span><tt>+</tt><span class="docEmphasis">value</span>: add <span class="docEmphasis">value</span> to semaphore <span class="docEmphasis">semnum</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">semnum</span><tt>-</tt><span class="docEmphasis">value</span>: subtract <span class="docEmphasis">value</span> from semaphore <span class="docEmphasis">semnum</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">semnum</span><tt>=0</tt>: test semaphore <span class="docEmphasis">semnum</span> to see if it equals 0.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">At the end of each operation, we can optionally include an <span class="docEmphasis">n</span>, a <span class="docEmphasis">u</span>, or both. The letter <span class="docEmphasis">n</span> means include <tt>IPC_NOWAIT</tt> in the <span class="docEmphasis">sem_flg</span> value for this operation. The letter <span class="docEmphasis">u</span> means include <tt>SEM_UNDO</tt> in <span class="docEmphasis">sem_flg</span>. (We describe the <tt>SEM_UNDO</tt> flag in Section 47.8.)</p><p class="docText">The following command line specifies two <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> calls on the semaphore set whose identifier is 0:</p><pre>$ <b>./svsem_op 0 0=0 0-1,1-2n</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The first command-line argument specifies a <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> call that waits until semaphore zero equals 0. The second argument specifies a <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> call that subtracts 1 from semaphore 0, and subtracts 2 from semaphore 1. For the operation on semaphore 0, <span class="docEmphasis">sem_flg</span> is 0; for the operation on semaphore 1, <span class="docEmphasis">sem_flg</span> is <tt>IPC_NOWAIT</tt>.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EZQCM">Example 47-8. Performing System V semaphore operations with <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>svsem/svsem_op.c</b>
#include &lt;sys/types.h&gt;
#include &lt;sys/sem.h&gt;
#include &lt;ctype.h&gt;
#include "curr_time.h"          /* Declaration of currTime() */
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

#define MAX_SEMOPS 1000         /* Maximum operations that we permit for
                                   a single semop() */

static void
usageError(const char *progName)
{
    fprintf(stderr, "Usage: %s semid op[,op...] ...\n\n", progName);
    fprintf(stderr, "'op' is either: &lt;sem#&gt;{+|-}&lt;value&gt;[n][u]\n");
    fprintf(stderr, "            or: &lt;sem#&gt;=0[n]\n");
    fprintf(stderr, "       \"n\" means include IPC_NOWAIT in 'op'\n");
    fprintf(stderr, "       \"u\" means include SEM_UNDO in 'op'\n\n");
    fprintf(stderr, "The operations in each argument are "
                    "performed in a single semop() call\n\n");
    fprintf(stderr, "e.g.: %s 12345 0+1,1-2un\n", progName);
    fprintf(stderr, "      %s 12345 0=0n 1+1,2-1u 1=0\n", progName);
    exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
}

/* Parse comma-delimited operations in 'arg', returning them in the
   array 'sops'. Return number of operations as function result. */

static int
parseOps(char *arg, struct sembuf sops[])
{
    char *comma, *sign, *remaining, *flags;
    int numOps;                 /* Number of operations in 'arg' */

    for (numOps = 0, remaining = arg; ; numOps++) {
        if (numOps &gt;= MAX_SEMOPS)
            cmdLineErr("Too many operations (maximum=%d): \"%s\"\n",
                        MAX_SEMOPS, arg);

        if (*remaining == '\0')
            fatal("Trailing comma or empty argument: \"%s\"", arg);
        if (!isdigit((unsigned char) *remaining))
            cmdLineErr("Expected initial digit: \"%s\"\n", arg);

        sops[numOps].sem_num = strtol(remaining, &amp;sign, 10);

        if (*sign == '\0' || strchr("+-=", *sign) == NULL)
            cmdLineErr("Expected '+', '-', or '=' in \"%s\"\n", arg);
        if (!isdigit((unsigned char) *(sign + 1)))
            cmdLineErr("Expected digit after '%c' in \"%s\"\n", *sign, arg);

        sops[numOps].sem_op = strtol(sign + 1, &amp;flags, 10);

        if (*sign == '-')                       /* Reverse sign of operation */
            sops[numOps].sem_op = - sops[numOps].sem_op;
        else if (*sign == '=')                  /* Should be '=0' */
            if (sops[numOps].sem_op != 0)
                cmdLineErr("Expected \"=0\" in \"%s\"\n", arg);

        sops[numOps].sem_flg = 0;
        for (;; flags++) {
            if (*flags == 'n')
                sops[numOps].sem_flg |= IPC_NOWAIT;
            else if (*flags == 'u')
                sops[numOps].sem_flg |= SEM_UNDO;
            else
                break;
        }

        if (*flags != ',' &amp;&amp; *flags != '\0')
            cmdLineErr("Bad trailing character (%c) in \"%s\"\n", *flags, arg);

        comma = strchr(remaining, ',');
        if (comma == NULL)
            break;                              /* No comma --&gt; no more ops */
        else
            remaining = comma + 1;
    }

    return numOps + 1;
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    struct sembuf sops[MAX_SEMOPS];
    int ind, nsops;

    if (argc &lt; 2 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageError(argv[0]);

    for (ind = 2; argv[ind] != NULL; ind++) {
        nsops = parseOps(argv[ind], sops);

        printf("%5ld, %s: about to semop()  [%s]\n", (long) getpid(),
                currTime("%T"), argv[ind]);

        if (semop(getInt(argv[1], 0, "semid"), sops, nsops) == -1)
            errExit("semop (PID=%ld)", (long) getpid());

        printf("%5ld, %s: semop() completed [%s]\n", (long) getpid(),
                currTime("%T"), argv[ind]);
    }

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
      <b>svsem/svsem_op.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">Using the program in Example 47-8,
 along with various others shown in this chapter, we can study the 
operation of System V semaphores, as demonstrated in the following shell
 session. We begin by using a program that creates a semaphore set 
containing two semaphores, which we initialize to 1 and 0:</p><pre>$ <b>./svsem_create -p 2 </b>
32769                                               <i> ID of semaphore set</i>
$ <b>./svsem_setall 32769 1 0 </b>
Semaphore values changed (PID=3658)</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">We don’t show the code of the <tt>svsem/svsem_create.c</tt>
 program in this chapter, but it is provided in the source code 
distribution for this book. This program performs the same function for 
semaphores as the program in Example 46-1 (in Section 46.1) performs for message queues; that is, it creates a semaphore set. The only notable difference is that <tt>svsem_create.c</tt> takes an additional argument specifying the size of the semaphore set to be created.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Next, we start three background instances of the program in Example 47-8 to perform <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span>
 operations on the semaphore set. The program prints messages before and
 after each semaphore operation. These messages include the time, so 
that we can see when each operation starts and when it completes, and 
the process ID, so that we can track the operation of multiple instances
 of the program. The first command makes a request to decrease both 
semaphores by 1:</p><pre>$ <b>./svsem_op 32769 0-1,1-1 &amp; </b>                        <i> Operation 1</i>
 3659, 16:02:05: about to semop()  [0-1,1-1]
[1] 3659</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In the above output, we see that the program printed a message saying that the <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> operation is about to be performed, but did not print any further messages, because the <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> call blocks. The call blocks because semaphore 1 has the value 0.</p><p class="docText">Next, we execute a command that makes a request to decrease semaphore 1 by 1:</p><pre>$ <b>./svsem_op 32769 1-1 &amp; </b>                            <i> Operation 2</i>
 3660, 16:02:22: about to semop()  [1-1]
[2] 3660</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This command also blocks. Next, we execute a command that waits for the value of semaphore 0 to equal 0:</p><pre>$ <b>./svsem_op 32769 0=0 &amp; </b>                            <i> Operation 3</i>
 3661, 16:02:27: about to semop()  [0=0]
[3] 3661</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Again, this command blocks, in this case because the value of semaphore 0 is currently 1.</p><p class="docText">Now, we use the program in Example 47-3 to inspect the semaphore set:</p><pre>$ <b>./svsem_mon 32769</b>
Semaphore changed: Sun Jul 25 16:01:53 2010
Last semop():      Thu Jan  1 01:00:00 1970
Sem #  Value  SEMPID  SEMNCNT  SEMZCNT
  0       1       0      1        1
  1       0       0      2        0</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">When a semaphore set is created, the <span class="docEmphasis">sem_otime</span> field of the associated <span class="docEmphasis">semid_ds</span> data structure is initialized to 0. A calendar time value of 0 corresponds to the Epoch (Section 10.1), and <span class="docEmphasis">ctime()</span> displays this as 1 AM, 1 January 1970, since the local timezone is Central Europe, one hour ahead of UTC.</p><p class="docText">Examining the output further, we can see that, for semaphore 0, the <span class="docEmphasis">semncnt</span> value is 1 because operation 1 is waiting to decrease the semaphore value, and <span class="docEmphasis">semzcnt</span>
 is 1 because operation 3 is waiting for this semaphore to equal 0. For 
semaphore 1, the semncnt value of 2 reflects the fact that operation 1 
and operation 2 are waiting to decrease the semaphore value.</p><p class="docText">Next,
 we try a nonblocking operation on the semaphore set. This operation 
waits for semaphore 0 to equal 0. Since this operation can’t be 
immediately performed, <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> fails with the error <tt>EAGAIN</tt>:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>./svsem_op 32769 0=0n </b>                             <i> Operation 4</i>
 3673, 16:03:13: about to semop()  [0=0n]
ERROR [EAGAIN/EWOULDBLOCK Resource temporarily unavailable] semop (PID=3673)

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Now we add 1 to semaphore 1. This causes two of the earlier blocked operations (1 and 3) to unblock:</p><pre>$ <b>./svsem_op 32769 1+1 </b>                              <i> Operation 5</i>
 3674, 16:03:29: about to semop()  [1+1]
 3659, 16:03:29: semop() completed [0-1,1-1]        <i> Operation 1 completes</i>
 3661, 16:03:29: semop() completed [0=0]            <i> Operation 3 completes</i>
 3674, 16:03:29: semop() completed [1+1]            <i> Operation 5 completes</i>
[1]   Done              ./svsem_op 32769 0-1,1-1
[3]+  Done              ./svsem_op 32769 0=0</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">When we use our monitoring program to inspect the state of the semaphore set, we see that the <span class="docEmphasis">sem_otime</span> field of the associated <span class="docEmphasis">semid_ds</span> data structure has been updated, and the <span class="docEmphasis">sempid</span> values of both semaphores have been updated. We also see that the <span class="docEmphasis">semncnt</span> value for semaphore 1 is 1, since operation 2 is still blocked, waiting to decrease the value of this semaphore:</p><pre>$ <b>./svsem_mon 32769</b>
Semaphore changed: Sun Jul 25 16:01:53 2010
Last semop():      Sun Jul 25 16:03:29 2010
Sem #  Value  SEMPID  SEMNCNT  SEMZCNT
  0       0    3661      0        0
  1       0    3659      1        0</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">From the above output, we see that the <span class="docEmphasis">sem_otime</span>
 value has been updated. We also see that semaphore 0 was last operated 
on by process ID 3661 (operation 3) and semaphore 1 was last operated on
 by process ID 3659 (operation 1).</p><p class="docText">Finally, we remove the semaphore set. This causes the still blocked operation 2 to fail with the error <tt>EIDRM</tt>:</p><pre>$ <b>./svsem_rm 32769</b>
ERROR [EIDRM Identifier removed] semop (PID=3660)</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">We don’t show the source code for the <tt>svsem/svsem_rm.c</tt>
 program in this chapter, but it is provided in the source code 
distribution for this book. This program removes the semaphore set 
identified by its command-line argument.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
