<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>47.8. Semaphore Undo Values</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">47.8. Semaphore Undo Values</h3><p class="docText">Suppose
 that, having adjusted the value of a semaphore (e.g., decreased the 
semaphore value so that it is now 0), a process then terminates, either 
deliberately or accidentally. By default, the semaphore’s value is left 
unchanged. This may constitute a problem for other processes using the 
semaphore, since they may be blocked waiting on that semaphore—that is, 
waiting for the now-terminated process to undo the change it made.</p><p class="docText">To avoid such problems, we can employ the <tt>SEM_UNDO</tt> flag when changing the value of a semaphore via <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span>.
 When this flag is specified, the kernel records the effect of the 
semaphore operation, and then undoes the operation if the process 
terminates. The undo happens regardless of whether the process 
terminates normally or abnormally.</p><p class="docText">The kernel doesn’t need to keep a record of all operations performed using <tt>SEM_UNDO</tt>. It suffices to record the <span class="docEmphasis">sum</span> of all of the semaphore adjustments performed using <tt>SEM_UNDO</tt> in a per-semaphore, per-process integer total called the <span class="docEmphasis">semadj</span>
 (semaphore adjustment) value. When the process terminates, all that is 
necessary is to subtract this total from the semaphore’s current value.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Since Linux 2.6, processes (threads) created using <span class="docEmphasis">clone()</span> share <span class="docEmphasis">semadj</span> values if the <tt>CLONE_SYSVSEM</tt>
 flag is employed. Such sharing is required for a conforming 
implementation of POSIX threads. The NPTL threading implementation 
employs <tt>CLONE_SYSVSEM</tt> for the implementation of <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_create()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">When a semaphore value is set using the <span class="docEmphasis">semctl()</span> <tt>SETVAL</tt> or <tt>SETALL</tt> operation, the corresponding <span class="docEmphasis">semadj</span>
 values are cleared (i.e., set to 0) in all processes using the 
semaphore. This makes sense, since absolutely setting the value of a 
semaphore destroys the value associated with the historical record 
maintained in the <span class="docEmphasis">semadj</span> total.</p><p class="docText">A child created via <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> doesn’t inherit its parent’s <span class="docEmphasis">semadj</span> values; it doesn’t make sense for a child to undo its parent’s semaphore operations. On the other hand, <span class="docEmphasis">semadj</span> values are preserved across an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>. This permits us to adjust a semaphore value using <tt>SEM_UNDO</tt>, and then <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>
 a program that performs no operation on the semaphore, but does 
automatically adjust the semaphore on process termination. (This can be 
used as a technique that allows another process to discover when this 
process terminates.)</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENJCM">47.8.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ERJCM">47.8.1.1. Example of the effect of <tt>SEM_UNDO</tt></h5><p class="docText">The following shell session log shows the effect of performing operations on two semaphores: one operation with the <tt>SEM_UNDO</tt> flag and one without. We begin by creating a set containing two semaphores:</p><pre>$ <b>./svsem_create -p 2</b>
131073</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Next, we execute a command that adds 1 to both semaphores and then terminates. The operation on semaphore 0 specifies the <tt>SEM_UNDO</tt> flag:</p><pre>$ <b>./svsem_op 131073 0+1u 1+1</b>
 2248, 06:41:56: about to semop()
 2248, 06:41:56: semop() completed</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Now, we use the program in Example 47-3 to check the state of the semaphores:</p><pre>$ <b>./svsem_mon 131073</b>
Semaphore changed: Sun Jul 25 06:41:34 2010
Last semop():      Sun Jul 25 06:41:56 2010
Sem #  Value  SEMPID  SEMNCNT  SEMZCNT
  0       0    2248      0        0
  1       1    2248      0        0</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Looking at the semaphore 
values in the last two lines of the above output, we can see that the 
operation on semaphore 0 was undone, but the operation on semaphore 1 
was not undone.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EYLCM">47.8.1.2. Limitations of <tt>SEM_UNDO</tt></h5><p class="docText">We conclude by noting that the <tt>SEM_UNDO</tt>
 flag is less useful than it first appears, for two reasons. One is that
 because modifying a semaphore typically corresponds to acquiring or 
releasing some shared resource, the use of <tt>SEM_UNDO</tt>
 on its own may be insufficient to allow a multiprocess application to 
recover in the event that a process unexpectedly terminates. Unless 
process termination also automatically returns the shared resource state
 to a consistent state (unlikely in many scenarios), undoing a semaphore
 operation is probably insufficient to allow the application to recover.</p><p class="docText">The second factor limiting the utility of <tt>SEM_UNDO</tt>
 is that, in some cases, it is not possible to perform semaphore 
adjustments when a process terminates. Consider the following scenario, 
applied to a semaphore whose initial value is 0:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Process A increases the value of a semaphore by 2, specifying the <tt>SEM_UNDO</tt> flag for the operation.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Process B decreases the value of the semaphore by 1, so that it has the value 1.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Process A terminates.</p></div></li></ol></div><p class="docText">At
 this point, it is impossible to completely undo the effect of process 
A’s operation in step 1, since the value of the semaphore is too low. 
There are three possible ways to resolve this situation:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Force the process to block until the semaphore adjustment is possible.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Decrease the semaphore value as far as possible (i.e., to 0) and exit.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Exit without performing any semaphore adjustment.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The
 first solution is infeasible since it might force a terminating process
 to block forever. Linux adopts the second solution. Some other UNIX 
implementations adopt the third solution. SUSv3 is silent on what an 
implementation should do in this situation.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">An undo operation that attempts to raise a semaphore’s value above its permitted maximum value of 32,767 (the <tt>SEMVMX</tt> limit, described Section 47.10)
 also causes anomalous behavior. In this case, the kernel always 
performs the adjustment, thus (illegitimately) raising the semaphore’s 
value above <tt>SEMVMX</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
