<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>47.9. Implementing a Binary Semaphores Protocol</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">47.9. Implementing a Binary Semaphores Protocol</h3><p class="docText">The
 API for System V semaphores is complex, both because semaphore values 
can be adjusted by arbitrary amounts, and because semaphores are 
allocated and operated upon in sets. Both of these features provide more
 functionality than is typically needed within applications, and so it 
is useful to implement some simpler protocols (APIs) on top of System V 
semaphores.</p><p class="docText">One commonly used protocol is binary semaphores. A binary semaphore has two values: <span class="docEmphasis">available</span> (free) and <span class="docEmphasis">reserved</span> (in use). Two operations are defined for binary semaphores:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Reserve</span>:
 Attempt to reserve this semaphore for exclusive use. If the semaphore 
is already reserved by another process, then block until the semaphore 
is released.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Release</span>: Free a currently reserved semaphore, so that it can be reserved by another process.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In academic computer science, these two operations often go by the names <span class="docEmphasis">P</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">V</span>,
 the first letters of the Dutch terms for these operations. This 
nomenclature was coined by the late Dutch computer scientist Edsger 
Dijkstra, who produced much of the early theoretical work on semaphores.
 The terms <span class="docEmphasis">down</span> (decrement the semaphore) and <span class="docEmphasis">up</span> (increment the semaphore) are also used. POSIX terms the two operations <span class="docEmphasis">wait</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">post</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li></ul><p class="docText">A third operation is also sometimes defined:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Reserve conditionally</span>:
 Make a nonblocking attempt to reserve this semaphore for exclusive use.
 If the semaphore is already reserved, then immediately return a status 
indicating that the semaphore is unavailable.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">In implementing binary semaphores, we must choose how to represent the <span class="docEmphasis">available</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">reserved</span>
 states, and how to implement the above operations. A moment’s 
reflection leads us to realize that the best way to represent the states
 is to use the value 1 for <span class="docEmphasis">free</span> and the value 0 for <span class="docEmphasis">reserved</span>, with the <span class="docEmphasis">reserve</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">release</span> operations decrementing and incrementing the semaphore value by one.</p><p class="docText">Example 47-9 and Example 47-10
 provide an implementation of binary semaphores using System V 
semaphores. As well as providing the prototypes of the functions in the 
implementation, the header file in Example 47-9 declares two global Boolean variables exposed by the implementation. The <span class="docEmphasis">bsUseSemUndo</span> variable controls whether the implementation uses the <tt>SEM_UNDO</tt> flag in <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> calls. The <span class="docEmphasis">bsRetryOnEintr</span> variable controls whether the implementation restarts <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> calls that are interrupted by signals.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ETMCM">Example 47-9. Header file for <tt>binary_sems.c</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre><b>svsem/binary_sems.h</b>
#ifndef BINARY_SEMS_H           /* Prevent accidental double inclusion */
#define BINARY_SEMS_H

#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

/* Variables controlling operation of functions below */

extern Boolean bsUseSemUndo;            /* Use SEM_UNDO during semop()? */
extern Boolean bsRetryOnEintr;          /* Retry if semop() interrupted by
                                           signal handler? */

int initSemAvailable(int semId, int semNum);

int initSemInUse(int semId, int semNum);

int reserveSem(int semId, int semNum);

int releaseSem(int semId, int semNum);

#endif
     <b>svsem/binary_sems.h</b></pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">Example 47-10
 shows the implementation of the binary semaphore functions. Each 
function in this implementation takes two arguments, which identify a 
semaphore set and the number of a semaphore within that set. (These 
functions don’t deal with the creation and deletion of semaphore sets; 
nor do they handle the race condition described in Section 47.5.) We 
employ these functions in the example programs shown in Section 48.4.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EGNCM">Example 47-10. Implementing binary semaphores using System V semaphores</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>svsem/binary_sems.c</b>
#include &lt;sys/types.h&gt;
#include &lt;sys/sem.h&gt;
#include "semun.h"                      /* Definition of semun union */
#include "binary_sems.h"

Boolean bsUseSemUndo = FALSE;
Boolean bsRetryOnEintr = TRUE;

int                     /* Initialize semaphore to 1 (i.e., "available") */
initSemAvailable(int semId, int semNum)
{
    union semun arg;

    arg.val = 1;
    return semctl(semId, semNum, SETVAL, arg);
}

int                     /* Initialize semaphore to 0 (i.e., "in use") */
initSemInUse(int semId, int semNum)
{
    union semun arg;

    arg.val = 0;
    return semctl(semId, semNum, SETVAL, arg);
}

/* Reserve semaphore (blocking), return 0 on success, or -1 with 'errno'
   set to EINTR if operation was interrupted by a signal handler */

int                     /* Reserve semaphore - decrement it by 1 */
reserveSem(int semId, int semNum)
{
    struct sembuf sops;

    sops.sem_num = semNum;
    sops.sem_op = -1;
    sops.sem_flg = bsUseSemUndo ? SEM_UNDO : 0;

    while (semop(semId, &amp;sops, 1) == -1)
        if (errno != EINTR || !bsRetryOnEintr)
            return -1;

    return 0;
}

int                     /* Release semaphore - increment it by 1 */
releaseSem(int semId, int semNum)
{
    struct sembuf sops;

    sops.sem_num = semNum;
    sops.sem_op = 1;
    sops.sem_flg = bsUseSemUndo ? SEM_UNDO : 0;

    return semop(semId, &amp;sops, 1);
}
     <b>svsem/binary_sems.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
