<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>47.10. Semaphore Limits</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">47.10. Semaphore Limits</h3><p class="docText">Most
 UNIX implementations impose various limits on the operation of System V
 semaphores. The following is a list of the Linux semaphore limits. The 
system call affected by the limit and the error that results if the 
limit is reached are noted in parentheses.</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SEMAEM</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is the maximum value that can be recorded in a <span class="docEmphasis">semadj</span> total. <tt>SEMAEM</tt> is defined to have the same value as <tt>SEMVMX</tt> (described below). (<span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span>, <tt>ERANGE</tt>)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SEMMNI</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is a system-wide limit on the number of semaphore identifiers (in other words, semaphore sets) that can be created. (<span class="docEmphasis">semget()</span>, <tt>ENOSPC</tt>)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SEMMSL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is the maximum number of semaphores that can be allocated in a semaphore set. (<span class="docEmphasis">semget()</span>, <tt>EINVAL</tt>)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SEMMNS</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This
 is a system-wide limit on the number of semaphores in all semaphore 
sets. The number of semaphores on the system is also limited by <tt>SEMMNI</tt> and <tt>SEMMSL</tt>; in fact, the default value for <tt>SEMMNS</tt> is the product of the defaults for these two limits. (<span class="docEmphasis">semget()</span>, <tt>ENOSPC</tt>)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SEMOPM</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is the maximum number of operations per <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> call. (<span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span>, <tt>E2BIG</tt>)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SEMVMX</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is the maximum value for a semaphore. (<span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span>, <tt>ERANGE</tt>)</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">The
 limits above appear on most UNIX implementations. Some UNIX 
implementations (but not Linux) impose the following additional limits 
relating to semaphore undo operations (Section 47.8):</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SEMMNU</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is a system-wide limit on the total number of semaphore undo structures. Undo structures are allocated to store <span class="docEmphasis">semadj</span> values.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SEMUME</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is the maximum number of undo entries per semaphore undo structure.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">At
 system startup, the semaphore limits are set to default values. These 
defaults may vary across kernel versions. (Some distributors’ kernels 
set different defaults from those provided by vanilla kernels.) Some of 
these limits can be modified by changing the values stored in the 
Linux-specific <tt>/proc/sys/kernel/sem</tt> file. This file contains four space-delimited numbers defining, in order, the limits <tt>SEMMSL</tt>, <tt>SEMMNS</tt>, <tt>SEMOPM</tt>, and <tt>SEMMNI</tt>. (The <tt>SEMVMX</tt> and <tt>SEMAEM</tt>
 limits can’t be changed; both are fixed at 32,767.) As an example, here
 are the default limits that we see for Linux 2.6.31 on one x86-32 
system:</p><pre>$ <b>cd /proc/sys/kernel</b>
$ <b>cat sem</b>
250     32000   32      128</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The formats employed in the Linux <tt>/proc</tt>
 file system are inconsistent for the three System V IPC mechanisms. For
 message queues and shared memory, each configurable limit is controlled
 by a separate file. For semaphores, one file holds all configurable 
limits. This is a historical accident that occurred during the 
development of these APIs and is difficult to rectify for compatibility 
reasons.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Table 47-1
 shows the maximum value to which each limit can be raised on the x86-32
 architecture. Note the following supplementary information to this 
table:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">It is possible to raise <tt>SEMMSL</tt> to values larger than 65,536, and create semaphore sets up to that larger size. However, it isn’t possible to use <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> to adjust semaphores in the set beyond the 65,536th element.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Because
 of certain limitations in the current implementation, the practical 
recommended upper limit on the size of a semaphore set is around 8000.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li><li><p class="docList">The practical ceiling for the <tt>SEMMNS</tt> limit is governed by the amount of RAM available on the system.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The ceiling value for the <tt>SEMOPM</tt>
 limit is determined by memory allocation primitives used within the 
kernel. The recommended maximum is 1000. In practical usage, it is 
rarely useful to perform more than a few operations in a single <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> call.</p></li></ul><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 47-1. System V semaphore limits</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Limit</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Ceiling value (x86-32)</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SEMMNI</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>32768 (IPCMNI)</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SEMMSL</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>65536</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SEMMNS</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>2147483647 (INT_MAX)</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SEMOPM</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">See text</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">The Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">semctl()</span> <tt>IPC_INFO</tt> operation retrieves a structure of type <span class="docEmphasis">seminfo</span>, which contains the values of the various semaphore limits:</p><pre>union semun arg;
struct seminfo buf;

arg.__buf = &buf;
semctl(0, 0, IPC_INFO, arg);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">A related Linux-specific operation, <tt>SEM_INFO</tt>, retrieves a <span class="docEmphasis">seminfo</span> structure that contains information about actual resources used for semaphore objects. An example of the use of <tt>SEM_INFO</tt> is provided in the file <tt>svsem/svsem_info.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p><p class="docText">Details about <tt>IPC_INFO</tt>, <tt>SEM_INFO</tt>, and the <span class="docEmphasis">seminfo</span> structure can be found in the <span class="docEmphasis">semctl(2)</span> manual page.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
