<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>47.11. Disadvantages of System V Semaphores</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">47.11. Disadvantages of System V Semaphores</h3><p class="docText">System V semaphores have many of the same disadvantages as message queues (Section 46.9), including the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Semaphores
 are referred to by identifiers, rather than the file descriptors used 
by most other UNIX I/O and IPC mechanisms. This makes it difficult to 
perform operations such as simultaneously waiting both on a semaphore 
and on input from a file descriptor. (It is possible to resolve this 
difficulty by creating a child process or thread that operates on the 
semaphore and writes messages to a pipe monitored, along with other file
 descriptors, using one of the methods described in Chapter 63.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">The use of keys, rather than filenames, to identify semaphores results in additional programming complexity.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The
 use of separate system calls for creating and initializing semaphores 
means that, in some cases, we must do extra programming work to avoid 
race conditions when initializing a semaphore.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The
 kernel doesn’t maintain a count of the number of processes referring to
 a semaphore set. This complicates the decision about when it is 
appropriate to delete a semaphore set and makes it difficult to ensure 
that an unused set is deleted.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The
 programming interface provided by System V is overly complex. In the 
common case, a program operates on a single semaphore. The ability to 
simultaneously operate on multiple semaphores in a set is unnecessary.</p></li><li><p class="docList">There
 are various limits on the operation of semaphores. These limits are 
configurable, but if an application operates outside the range of the 
default limits, this nevertheless requires extra work when installing 
the application.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">However,
 unlike the situation with message queues, there are fewer alternatives 
to System V semaphores, and consequently there are more situations in 
which we may choose to employ them. One alternative to the use of 
semaphores is record locking, which we describe in Chapter 55.
 Also, from kernel 2.6 onward, Linux supports the use of POSIX 
semaphores for process synchronization. We describe POSIX semaphores in Chapter 53.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
