<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>47.12. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">47.12. Summary</h3><p class="docText">System
 V semaphores allow processes to synchronize their actions. This is 
useful when a process must gain exclusive access to some shared 
resource, such as a region of shared memory.</p><p class="docText">Semaphores
 are created and operated upon in sets containing one or more 
semaphores. Each semaphore within a set is an integer whose value is 
always greater than or equal to 0. The <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span>
 system call allows the caller to add an integer to a semaphore, 
subtract an integer from a semaphore, or wait for a semaphore to equal 
0. The last two of these operations may cause the caller to block.</p><p class="docText">A
 semaphore implementation is not required to initialize the members of a
 new semaphore set, so an application must initialize the set after 
creating it. When any of a number of peer processes may try to create 
and initialize the semaphore, special care must be taken to avoid the 
race condition that results from the fact that these two steps are 
performed via separate system calls.</p><p class="docText">Where
 multiple processes are trying to decrease a semaphore by the same 
amount, it is indeterminate which process will actually be permitted to 
perform the operation first. However, where different processes are 
trying to decrease a semaphore by different amounts, the operations 
complete in the order in which they become possible, and we may need to 
take care to avoid scenarios where a process is starved because the 
semaphore value never reaches a level that would allow the process’s 
operation to proceed.</p><p class="docText">The <tt>SEM_UNDO</tt>
 flag allows a process’s semaphore operations to be automatically undone
 on process termination. This can be useful to avoid scenarios where a 
process accidentally terminates, leaving a semaphore in a state that 
causes other processes to block indefinitely waiting for the semaphore’s
 value to be changed by the terminated process.</p><p class="docText">System
 V semaphores are allocated and operated upon in sets, and can be 
increased and decreased by arbitrary amounts. This provides more 
functionality than is needed by most applications. A common requirement 
is for individual binary semaphores, which take on only the values 0 and
 1. We showed how to implement binary semaphores on top of System V 
semaphores.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EUKCM">47.12.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EYKCM">47.12.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">[Bovet
 &amp; Cesati, 2005] and [Maxwell, 1999] provide some background on the 
implementation of semaphores on Linux. [Dijkstra, 1968] is a classic 
early paper on semaphore theory.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
