<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>47.13. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">47.13. Exercises</h3><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Experiment with the program in Example 47-8 (<tt>svsem_op.c</tt>) to confirm your understanding of the <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> system call.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Modify the program in Example 24-6 (<tt>fork_sig_sync.c</tt>, in Section 24.5) to use semaphores instead of signals to synchronize the parent and child processes.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Experiment with the program in Example 47-8 (<tt>svsem_op.c</tt>) and the other semaphore programs provided in this chapter to see what happens to the <span class="docEmphasis">sempid</span> value if an exiting process performs a <tt>SEM_UNDO</tt> adjustment to a semaphore.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Add a <span class="docEmphasis">reserveSemNB()</span> function to the code in Example 47-10 (<tt>binary_sems.c</tt>) to implement the <span class="docEmphasis">reserve conditionally</span> operation, using the <tt>IPC_NOWAIT</tt> flag.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">For the VMS operating system, Digital provided a synchronization method similar to a binary semaphore, called an <span class="docEmphasis">event flag</span>. An event flag has two possible values, <span class="docEmphasis">clear</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">set</span>, and the following four operations can be performed: <span class="docEmphasis">setEventFlag</span>, to set the flag; <span class="docEmphasis">clearEventFlag</span>, to clear the flag; <span class="docEmphasis">waitForEventFlag</span>, to block until the flag is set; and <span class="docEmphasis">getFlagState</span>,
 to obtain the current state of the flag. Devise an implementation of 
event flags using System V semaphores. This implementation will require 
two arguments for each of the functions above: a semaphore identifier 
and a semaphore number. (Consideration of the <span class="docEmphasis">waitForEventFlag</span> operation will lead you to realize that the values chosen for <span class="docEmphasis">clear</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">set</span> are not the obvious choices.)</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Implement
 a binary semaphores protocol using named pipes. Provide functions to 
reserve, release, and conditionally reserve the semaphore.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write a program, analogous to the program in Example 46-6 (<tt>svmsg_ls.c</tt>, in Section 46.7), that uses the <span class="docEmphasis">semctl()</span> <tt>SEM_INFO</tt> and <tt>SEM_STAT</tt> operations to obtain and display a list of all semaphore sets on the system.</p></div></li></ol></div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
