<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 48. System V Shared Memory</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0ELMCM">Chapter 48. System V Shared Memory</h2><p class="docText">This
 chapter describes System V shared memory. Shared memory allows two or 
more processes to share the same region (usually referred to as a <span class="docEmphasis">segment</span>)
 of physical memory. Since a shared memory segment becomes part of a 
process’s user-space memory, no kernel intervention is required for IPC.
 All that is required is that one process copies data into the shared 
memory; that data is immediately available to all other processes 
sharing the same segment. This provides fast IPC by comparison with 
techniques such as pipes or message queues, where the sending process 
copies data from a buffer in user space into kernel memory and the 
receiving process copies in the reverse direction. (Each process also 
incurs the overhead of a system call to perform the copy operation.)</p><p class="docText">On
 the other hand, the fact that IPC using shared memory is not mediated 
by the kernel means that, typically, some method of synchronization is 
required so that processes don’t simultaneously access the shared memory
 (e.g., two processes performing simultaneous updates, or one process 
fetching data from the shared memory while another process is in the 
middle of updating it). System V semaphores are a natural method for 
such synchronization. Other methods, such as POSIX semaphores (Chapter 53) and file locks (Chapter 55), are also possible.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> terminology, a memory region is <span class="docEmphasis">mapped</span> at an address, while in System V terminology, a shared memory segment is <span class="docEmphasis">attached</span>
 at an address. These terms are equivalent; the terminology differences 
are a consequence of the separate origins of these two APIs.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
