<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>48.1. Overview</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">48.1. Overview</h3><p class="docText">In order to use a shared memory segment, we typically perform the following steps:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Call <span class="docEmphasis">shmget()</span>
 to create a new shared memory segment or obtain the identifier of an 
existing segment (i.e., one created by another process). This call 
returns a shared memory identifier for use in later calls.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Use <span class="docEmphasis">shmat()</span> to <span class="docEmphasis">attach</span> the shared memory segment; that is, make the segment part of the virtual memory of the calling process.</p></li><li><p class="docList">At
 this point, the shared memory segment can be treated just like any 
other memory available to the program. In order to refer to the shared 
memory, the program uses the <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> value returned by the <span class="docEmphasis">shmat()</span> call, which is a pointer to the start of the shared memory segment in the process’s virtual address space.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Call <span class="docEmphasis">shmdt()</span>
 to detach the shared memory segment. After this call, the process can 
no longer refer to the shared memory. This step is optional, and happens
 automatically on process termination.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Call <span class="docEmphasis">shmctl()</span>
 to delete the shared memory segment. The segment will be destroyed only
 after all currently attached processes have detached it. Only one 
process needs to perform this step.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
