<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>48.2. Creating or Opening a Shared Memory Segment</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">48.2. Creating or Opening a Shared Memory Segment</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">shmget()</span>
 system call creates a new shared memory segment or obtains the 
identifier of an existing segment. The contents of a newly created 
shared memory segment are initialized to 0.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/types.h&gt;        /* For portability */
#include &lt;sys/shm.h&gt;

int <b>shmget</b>(key_t <span class="docEmphasis">key</span>, size_t <span class="docEmphasis">size</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">shmflg</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns shared memory segment identifier on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">key</span> argument is a key generated using one of the methods described in Section 45.2 (i.e., usually the value <tt>IPC_PRIVATE</tt> or a key returned by <span class="docEmphasis">ftok()</span>).</p><p class="docText">When we use <span class="docEmphasis">shmget()</span> to create a new shared memory segment, <span class="docEmphasis">size</span>
 specifies a positive integer that indicates the desired size of the 
segment, in bytes. The kernel allocates shared memory in multiples of 
the system page size, so <span class="docEmphasis">size</span> is effectively rounded up to the next multiple of the system page size. If we are using <span class="docEmphasis">shmget()</span> to obtain the identifier of an existing segment, then <span class="docEmphasis">size</span> has no effect on the segment, but it must be less than or equal to the size of the segment.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">shmflg</span> argument performs the same task as for the other IPC <span class="docEmphasis">get</span> calls, specifying the permissions (Table 15-4, in Section 15.4.1)
 to be placed on a new shared memory segment or checked against an 
existing segment. In addition, zero or more of the following flags can 
be ORed (|) in <span class="docEmphasis">shmflg</span> to control the operation of <span class="docEmphasis">shmget()</span>:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">IPC_CREAT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">If no segment with the specified <span class="docEmphasis">key</span> exists, create a new segment.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">IPC_EXCL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">If <tt>IPC_CREAT</tt> was also specified, and a segment with the specified <span class="docEmphasis">key</span> already exists, fail with the error <tt>EEXIST</tt>.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">The above flags are described in more detail in Section 45.1. In addition, Linux permits the following nonstandard flags:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SHM_HUGETLB</span></span> (since Linux 2.6)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">A privileged (<tt>CAP_IPC_LOCK</tt>) process can use this flag to create a shared memory segment that uses <span class="docEmphasis">huge pages</span>.
 Huge pages are a feature provided by many modern hardware architectures
 to manage memory using very large page sizes. (For example, x86-32 
allows 4-MB pages as an alternative to 4-kB pages.) On systems that have
 large amounts of memory, and where applications require large blocks of
 memory, using huge pages reduces the number of entries required in the 
hardware memory management unit’s translation look-aside buffer (TLB). 
This is beneficial because entries in the TLB are usually a scarce 
resource. See the kernel source file <tt>Documentation/vm/hugetlbpage.txt</tt> for further information.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SHM_NORESERVE</span></span> (since Linux 2.6.15)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This flag serves the same purpose for <span class="docEmphasis">shmget()</span> as the <tt>MAP_NORESERVE</tt> flag serves for <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span>. See Section 49.9.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">On success, <span class="docEmphasis">shmget()</span> returns the identifier for the new or existing shared memory segment.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
