<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>48.3. Using Shared Memory</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">48.3. Using Shared Memory</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">shmat()</span> system call attaches the shared memory segment identified by <span class="docEmphasis">shmid</span> to the calling process’s virtual address space.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/types.h&gt;        /* For portability */
#include &lt;sys/shm.h&gt;

void *<b>shmat</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">shmid</span>, const void *<span class="docEmphasis">shmaddr</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">shmflg</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns address at which shared memory is attached on success, or <span class="docEmphasis">(void *)</span> -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">shmaddr</span> argument and the setting of the <tt>SHM_RND</tt> bit in the <span class="docEmphasis">shmflg</span> bit-mask argument control how the segment is attached:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">If <span class="docEmphasis">shmaddr</span> is <tt>NULL</tt>,
 then the segment is attached at a suitable address selected by the 
kernel. This is the preferred method of attaching a segment.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If <span class="docEmphasis">shmaddr</span> is not <tt>NULL</tt>, and <tt>SHM_RND</tt> is not set, then the segment is attached at the address specified by <span class="docEmphasis">shmaddr</span>, which must be a multiple of the system page size (or the error <tt>EINVAL</tt> results).</p></li><li><p class="docList">If <span class="docEmphasis">shmaddr</span> is not <tt>NULL</tt>, and <tt>SHM_RND</tt> is set, then the segment is mapped at the address provided in <span class="docEmphasis">shmaddr</span>, rounded down to the nearest multiple of the constant <tt>SHMLBA</tt> (<span class="docEmphasis">shared memory low boundary address</span>). This constant is equal to some multiple of the system page size. Attaching a segment at an address that is a multiple of <tt>SHMLBA</tt>
 is necessary on some architectures in order to improve CPU cache 
performance and to prevent the possibility that different attaches of 
the same segment have inconsistent views within the CPU cache.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On the x86 architectures, <tt>SHMLBA</tt> is the same as the system page size, reflecting the fact that such caching inconsistencies can’t arise on those architectures.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Specifying a non-<tt>NULL</tt> value for <span class="docEmphasis">shmaddr</span><a name="second or"></a> (i.e., either the second or third option listed above) is not recommended, for the following reasons:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">It reduces the portability of an application. An address valid on one UNIX implementation may be invalid on another.</p></li><li><p class="docList">An
 attempt to attach a shared memory segment at a particular address will 
fail if that address is already in use. This could happen if, for 
example, the application (perhaps inside a library function) had already
 attached another segment or created a memory mapping at that address.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">As its function result, <span class="docEmphasis">shmat()</span>
 returns the address at which the shared memory segment is attached. 
This value can be treated like a normal C pointer; the segment looks 
just like any other part of the process’s virtual memory. Typically, we 
assign the return value from <span class="docEmphasis">shmat()</span> to a pointer to some programmer-defined structure, in order to impose that structure on the segment (see, for example, Example 48-2).</p><p class="docText">To attach a shared memory segment for read-only access, we specify the flag <tt>SHM_RDONLY</tt> in <span class="docEmphasis">shmflg</span>. Attempts to update the contents of a read-only segment result in a segmentation fault (the <tt>SIGSEGV</tt> signal). If <tt>SHM_RDONLY</tt> is not specified, the memory can be both read and modified.</p><p class="docText">To attach a shared memory segment, a process requires read and write permissions on the segment, unless <tt>SHM_RDONLY</tt> is specified, in which case only read permission is required.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">It
 is possible to attach the same shared memory segment multiple times 
within a process, and even to make one attach read-only while another is
 read-write. The contents of the memory at each attachment point are the
 same, since the different entries of the process virtual memory page 
tables are referring to the same physical pages of memory.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">One final value that may be specified in <span class="docEmphasis">shmflg</span> is <tt>SHM_REMAP</tt>. In this case, <span class="docEmphasis">shmaddr</span> must be non-<tt>NULL</tt>. This flag requests that the <span class="docEmphasis">shmat()</span> call replace any existing shared memory attachment or memory mapping in the range starting at <span class="docEmphasis">shmaddr</span>
 and continuing for the length of the shared memory segment. Normally, 
if we try to attach a shared memory segment at an address range that is 
already in use, the error <tt>EINVAL</tt> results. <tt>SHM_REMAP</tt> is a nonstandard Linux extension.</p><p class="docText">Table 48-1 summarizes the constants that can be ORed in the <span class="docEmphasis">shmflg</span> argument of <span class="docEmphasis">shmat()</span>.</p><p class="docText">When a process no longer needs to access a shared memory segment, it can call <span class="docEmphasis">shmdt()</span> to detach the segment from its virtual address space. The <span class="docEmphasis">shmaddr</span> argument identifies the segment to be detached. It should be a value returned by a previous call to <span class="docEmphasis">shmat()</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/types.h&gt;        /* For portability */
#include &lt;sys/shm.h&gt;

int <b>shmdt</b>(const void *<span class="docEmphasis">shmaddr</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Detaching a shared memory segment is not the same as deleting it. Deletion is performed using the <span class="docEmphasis">shmctl()</span> <tt>IPC_RMID</tt> operation, as described in Section 48.7.</p><p class="docText">A child created by <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>
 inherits its parent’s attached shared memory segments. Thus, shared 
memory provides an easy method of IPC between parent and child.</p><p class="docText">During an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>,
 all attached shared memory segments are detached. Shared memory 
segments are also automatically detached on process termination.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 48-1. <span class="docEmphasis">shmflg</span> bit-mask values for <span class="docEmphasis">shmat()</span></h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Value</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SHM_RDONLY</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Attach segment read-only</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SHM_REMAP</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Replace any existing mapping at <span class="docEmphasis">shmaddr</span></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SHM_RND</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Round <span class="docEmphasis">shmaddr</span> down to multiple of <tt>SHMLBA</tt> bytes</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
