<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>48.7. Shared Memory Control Operations</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">48.7. Shared Memory Control Operations</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">shmctl()</span> system call performs a range of control operations on the shared memory segment identified by <span class="docEmphasis">shmid</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/types.h&gt;        /* For portability */
#include &lt;sys/shm.h&gt;

int <b>shmctl</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">shmid</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">cmd</span>, struct shmid_ds *<span class="docEmphasis">buf</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">cmd</span> argument specifies the control operation to be performed. The <span class="docEmphasis">buf</span> argument is required by the <tt>IPC_STAT</tt> and <tt>IPC_SET</tt> operations (described below), and should be specified as <tt>NULL</tt> for the remaining operations.</p><p class="docText">In the remainder of this section, we describe the various operations that can be specified for <span class="docEmphasis">cmd</span>.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5VCM">48.7.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ECWCM">48.7.1.1. Generic control operations</h5><p class="docText">The
 following operations are the same as for other types of System V IPC 
objects. Further details about these operations, including the 
privileges and permissions required by the calling process, are 
described in Section 45.3.</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">IPC_RMID</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Mark the shared memory segment and its associated <span class="docEmphasis">shmid_ds</span>
 data structure for deletion. If no processes currently have the segment
 attached, deletion is immediate; otherwise, the segment is removed 
after all processes have detached from it (i.e., when the value of the <span class="docEmphasis">shm_nattch</span> field in the <span class="docEmphasis">shmid_ds</span>
 data structure falls to 0). In some applications, we can make sure that
 a shared memory segment is tidily cleared away on application 
termination by marking it for deletion immediately after all processes 
have attached it to their virtual address space with <span class="docEmphasis">shmat()</span>. This is analogous to unlinking a file once we’ve opened it.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On Linux, if a shared segment has been marked for deletion using <tt>IPC_RMID</tt>,
 but has not yet been removed because some process still has it 
attached, then it is possible for another process to attach that 
segment. However, this behavior is not portable: most UNIX 
implementations prevent new attaches to a segment marked for deletion. 
(SUSv3 is silent on what behavior should occur in this scenario.) A few 
Linux applications have come to depend on this behavior, which is why 
Linux has not been changed to match other UNIX implementations.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">IPC_STAT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Place a copy of the <span class="docEmphasis">shmid_ds</span> data structure associated with this shared memory segment in the buffer pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">buf</span>. (We describe this data structure in Section 48.8.)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">IPC_SET</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Update selected fields of the <span class="docEmphasis">shmid_ds</span> data structure associated with this shared memory segment using values in the buffer pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">buf</span>.</p></dd></dl><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E4YCM">48.7.1.2. Locking and unlocking shared memory</h5><p class="docText">A
 shared memory segment can be locked into RAM, so that it is never 
swapped out. This provides a performance benefit, since, once each page 
of the segment is memory-resident, an application is guaranteed never to
 be delayed by a page fault when it accesses the page. There are two <span class="docEmphasis">shmctl()</span> locking operations:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <tt>SHM_LOCK</tt> operation locks a shared memory segment into memory.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>SHM_UNLOCK</tt> operation unlocks the shared memory segment, allowing it to be swapped out.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">These operations are not specified by SUSv3, and they are not provided on all UNIX implementations.</p><p class="docText">In versions of Linux before 2.6.10, only privileged (<tt>CAP_IPC_LOCK</tt>)
 processes can lock a shared memory segment into memory. Since Linux 
2.6.10, an unprivileged process can lock and unlock a shared memory 
segment if its effective user ID matches either the owner or the creator
 user ID of the segment and (in the case of <tt>SHM_LOCK</tt>) the process has a sufficiently high <tt>RLIMIT_MEMLOCK</tt> resource limit. See Section 50.2 for details.</p><p class="docText">Locking
 a shared memory segment does not guarantee that all of the pages of the
 segment are memory-resident at the completion of the <span class="docEmphasis">shmctl()</span>
 call. Rather, nonresident pages are individually locked in only as they
 are faulted into memory by subsequent references by processes that have
 attached the shared memory segment. Once faulted in, the pages stay 
resident until subsequently unlocked, even if all processes detach the 
segment. (In other words, the <tt>SHM_LOCK</tt> operation sets a property of the shared memory segment, rather than a property of the calling process.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">By <span class="docEmphasis">faulted into memory</span>,
 we mean that when the process references the nonresident page, a page 
fault occurs. At this point, if the page is in the swap area, then it is
 reloaded into memory. If the page is being referenced for the first 
time, no corresponding page exists in the swap file. Therefore, the 
kernel allocates a new page of physical memory and adjusts the process’s
 page tables and the bookkeeping data structures for the shared memory 
segment.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">An alternative method of locking memory, with slightly different semantics, is the use of <span class="docEmphasis">mlock()</span>, which we describe in Section 50.2.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
