<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>48.8. Shared Memory Associated Data Structure</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">48.8. Shared Memory Associated Data Structure</h3><p class="docText">Each shared memory segment has an associated <span class="docEmphasis">shmid_ds</span> data structure of the following form:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">struct shmid_ds {
    struct ipc_perm shm_perm;   /* Ownership and permissions */
    size_t   shm_segsz;         /* Size of segment in bytes */
    time_t   shm_atime;         /* Time of last shmat() */
    time_t   shm_dtime;         /* Time of last shmdt() */
    time_t   shm_ctime;         /* Time of last change */
    pid_t    shm_cpid;          /* PID of creator */
    pid_t    shm_lpid;          /* PID of last shmat() / shmdt() */
    shmatt_t shm_nattch;        /* Number of currently attached processes */
};

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">SUSv3 requires all of the fields shown here. Some other UNIX implementations include additional nonstandard fields in the <span class="docEmphasis">shmid_ds</span> structure.</p><p class="docText">The fields of the <span class="docEmphasis">shmid_ds</span> structure are implicitly updated by various shared memory system calls, and certain subfields of the <span class="docEmphasis">shm_perm</span> field can be explicitly updated using the <span class="docEmphasis">shmctl()</span> <tt>IPC_SET</tt> operation. The details are as follows:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">shm_perm</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">When the shared memory segment is created, the fields of this substructure are initialized as described in Section 45.3. The <span class="docEmphasis">uid</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">gid</span>, and (the lower 9 bits of the) <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> subfields can be updated via <tt>IPC_SET</tt>. As well as the usual permission bits, the <span class="docEmphasis">shm_perm.mode</span> field holds two read-only bit-mask flags. The first of these, <tt>SHM_DEST</tt> (destroy), indicates whether the segment is marked for deletion (via the <span class="docEmphasis">shmctl()</span> <tt>IPC_RMID</tt> operation) when all processes have detached it from their address space. The other flag, <tt>SHM_LOCKED</tt>, indicates whether the segment is locked into physical memory (via the <span class="docEmphasis">shmctl()</span> <tt>SHM_LOCK</tt>
 operation). Neither of these flags is standardized in SUSv3, and 
equivalents appear on only a few other UNIX implementations, in some 
cases with different names.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">shm_segsz</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">On
 creation of the shared memory segment, this field is set to the 
requested size of the segment in bytes (i.e., to the value of the <span class="docEmphasis">size</span> argument specified in the call to <span class="docEmphasis">shmget()</span>). As noted in Section 48.2, shared memory is allocated in units of pages, so the actual size of the segment may be larger than this value.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">shm_atime</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This
 field is set to 0 when the shared memory segment is created, and set to
 the current time whenever a process attaches the segment (<span class="docEmphasis">shmat()</span>). This field and the other timestamp fields in the <span class="docEmphasis">shmid_ds</span> structure are typed as <span class="docEmphasis">time_t</span>, and store time in seconds since the Epoch.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">shm_dtime</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This
 field is set to 0 when the shared memory segment is created, and set to
 the current time whenever a process detaches the segment (<span class="docEmphasis">shmdt()</span>).</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">shm_ctime</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This field is set to the current time when the segment is created, and on each successful <tt>IPC_SET</tt> operation.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">shm_cpid</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This field is set to the process ID of the process that created the segment using <span class="docEmphasis">shmget()</span>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">shm_lpid</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This
 field is set to 0 when the shared memory segment is created, and then 
set to the process ID of the calling process on each successful <span class="docEmphasis">shmat()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">shmdt()</span>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docEmphasis">shm_nattch</span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This
 field counts the number of processes that currently have the segment 
attached. It is initialized to 0 when the segment is created, and then 
incremented by each successful <span class="docEmphasis">shmat()</span> and decremented by each successful <span class="docEmphasis">shmdt()</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">shmatt_t</span> data type used to define this field is an unsigned integer type that SUSv3 requires to be at least the size of <span class="docEmphasis">unsigned short</span>. (On Linux, this type is defined as <span class="docEmphasis">unsigned long</span>.)</p></dd></dl>
</div>
</body>
</html>
