<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>48.9. Shared Memory Limits</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">48.9. Shared Memory Limits</h3><p class="docText">Most
 UNIX implementations impose various limits on System V shared memory. 
Below is a list of the Linux shared memory limits. The system call 
affected by the limit and the error that results if the limit is reached
 are noted in parentheses.</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SHMMNI</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This
 is a system-wide limit on the number of shared memory identifiers (in 
other words, shared memory segments) that can be created. (<span class="docEmphasis">shmget()</span>, <tt>ENOSPC</tt>)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SHMMIN</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This
 is the minimum size (in bytes) of a shared memory segment. This limit 
is defined with the value 1 (this can’t be changed). However, the 
effective limit is the system page size. (<span class="docEmphasis">shmget()</span>, <tt>EINVAL</tt>)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SHMMAX</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is the maximum size (in bytes) of a shared memory segment. The practical upper limit for <tt>SHMMAX</tt> depends on available RAM and swap space. (<span class="docEmphasis">shmget()</span>, <tt>EINVAL</tt>)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SHMALL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This
 is a system-wide limit on the total number of pages of shared memory. 
Most other UNIX implementations don’t provide this limit. The practical 
upper limit for <tt>SHMALL</tt> depends on available RAM and swap space. (<span class="docEmphasis">shmget()</span>, <tt>ENOSPC</tt>)</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">Some other UNIX implementations also impose the following limit (which is not implemented on Linux):</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SHMSEG</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This is a per-process limit on the number of attached shared memory segments.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">At
 system startup, the shared memory limits are set to default values. 
(These defaults may vary across kernel versions, and some distributors’ 
kernels set different defaults from those provided by vanilla kernels.) 
On Linux, some of the limits can be viewed or changed via files in the <tt>/proc</tt> file system. Table 48-2 lists the <tt>/proc</tt> file corresponding to each limit. As an example, here are the default limits that we see for Linux 2.6.31 on one x86-32 system:</p><pre>$ <b>cd /proc/sys/kernel</b>
$ <b>cat shmmni</b>
4096
$ <b>cat shmmax</b>
33554432
$ <b>cat shmall</b>
2097152</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">shmctl()</span> <tt>IPC_INFO</tt> operation retrieves a structure of type <span class="docEmphasis">shminfo</span>, which contains the values of the various shared memory limits:</p><pre>struct shminfo buf;

shmctl(0, IPC_INFO, (struct shmid_ds *) &amp;buf);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">A related Linux-specific operation, <tt>SHM_INFO</tt>, retrieves a structure of type <span class="docEmphasis">shm_info</span> that contains information about actual resources used for shared memory objects. An example of the use of <tt>SHM_INFO</tt> is provided in the file <tt>svshm/svshm_info.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p><p class="docText">Details about <tt>IPC_INFO</tt>, <tt>SHM_INFO</tt>, and the <span class="docEmphasis">shminfo</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">shm_info</span> structures can be found in the <span class="docEmphasis">shmctl(2)</span> manual page.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 48-2. System V shared memory limits</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Limit</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Ceiling value (x86-32)</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Corresponding file in <tt>/proc/sys/kernel</tt></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SHMMNI</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>32768</tt> (<tt>IPCMNI</tt>)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>shmmni</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SHMMAX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Depends on available memory</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>shmmax</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SHMALL</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Depends on available memory</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>shmall</tt></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
