<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>48.10. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">48.10. Summary</h3><p class="docText">Shared
 memory allows two or more processes to share the same pages of memory. 
No kernel intervention is required to exchange data via shared memory. 
Once a process has copied data into a shared memory segment, that data 
is immediately visible to other processes. Shared memory provides fast 
IPC, although this speed advantage is somewhat offset by the fact that 
normally we must use some type of synchronization technique, such as a 
System V semaphore, to synchronize access to the shared memory.</p><p class="docText">The
 recommended approach when attaching a shared memory segment is to allow
 the kernel to choose the address at which the segment is attached in 
the process’s virtual address space. This means that the segment may 
reside at different virtual addresses in different processes. For this 
reason, any references to addresses within the segment should be 
maintained as relative offsets, rather than as absolute pointers.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EVZCM">48.10.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EZZCM">48.10.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">The
 Linux memory-management scheme and some details of the implementation 
of shared memory are described in [Bovet &amp; Cesati, 2005].</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
