<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>48.11. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">48.11. Exercises</h3><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Replace the use of binary semaphores in Example 48-2 (<tt>svshm_xfr_writer.c</tt>) and Example 48-3 (<tt>svshm_xfr_reader.c</tt>) with the use of event flags (Exercise 47-5).</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Explain why the program in Example 48-3 incorrectly reports the number of bytes transferred if the <tt>for</tt> loop is modified as follows:</p><pre>for (xfrs = 0, bytes = 0; shmp-&gt;cnt != 0; xfrs++, bytes += shmp-&gt;cnt) {
    reserveSem(semid, READ_SEM);            /* Wait for our turn */

    if (write(STDOUT_FILENO, shmp-&gt;buf, shmp-&gt;cnt) != shmp-&gt;cnt)
        fatal("write");

    releaseSem(semid, WRITE_SEM);           /* Give writer a turn */
}</pre><br/>
</div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Try compiling the programs in Example 48-2 (<tt>svshm_xfr_writer.c</tt>) and Example 48-3 (<tt>svshm_xfr_reader.c</tt>) with a range of different sizes (defined by the constant <tt>BUF_SIZE</tt>) for the buffer used to exchange data between the two programs. Time the execution of <tt>svshm_xfr_reader.c</tt> for each buffer size.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write a program that displays the contents of the <span class="docEmphasis">shmid_ds</span> data structure (Section 48.8)
 associated with a shared memory segment. The identifier of the segment 
should be specified as a command-line argument. (See the program in Example 47-3, in Section 47.4.1, which performs the analogous task for System V semaphores.)</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write
 a directory service that uses a shared memory segment to publish 
name-value pairs. You will need to provide an API that allows callers to
 create a new name, modify an existing name, delete an existing name, 
and retrieve the value associated with a name. Use semaphores to ensure 
that a process performing an update to the shared memory segment has 
exclusive access to the segment.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write a program (analogous to program in Example 46-6, in Section 46.7) that uses the <span class="docEmphasis">shmctl()</span> <tt>SHM_INFO</tt> and <tt>SHM_STAT</tt> operations to obtain and display a list of all shared memory segments on the system.</p></div></li></ol></div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
