<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>49.1. Overview</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">49.1. Overview</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> system call creates a new <span class="docEmphasis">memory mapping</span> in the calling process’s virtual address space. A mapping can be of two types:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">File mapping</span>:
 A file mapping maps a region of a file directly into the calling 
process’s virtual memory. Once a file is mapped, its contents can be 
accessed by operations on the bytes in the corresponding memory region. 
The pages of the mapping are (automatically) loaded from the file as 
required. This type of mapping is also known as a <span class="docEmphasis">file-based mapping</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">memory-mapped file</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Anonymous mapping</span>: An anonymous mapping doesn’t have a corresponding file. Instead, the pages of the mapping are initialized to 0.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Another
 way of thinking of an anonymous mapping (and one that is close to the 
truth) is that it is a mapping of a virtual file whose contents are 
always initialized with zeros.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li></ul><p class="docText">The
 memory in one process’s mapping may be shared with mappings in other 
processes (i.e., the page-table entries of each process point to the 
same pages of RAM). This can occur in two ways:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">When two processes map the same region of a file, they share the same pages of physical memory.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A child process created by <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>
 inherits copies of its parent’s mappings, and these mappings refer to 
the same pages of physical memory as the corresponding mappings in the 
parent.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">When 
two or more processes share the same pages, each process can potentially
 see the changes to the page contents made by other processes, depending
 on whether the mapping is <span class="docEmphasis">private</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">shared</span>:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Private mapping</span> (<tt>MAP_PRIVATE</tt>):
 Modifications to the contents of the mapping are not visible to other 
processes and, for a file mapping, are not carried through to the 
underlying file. Although the pages of a private mapping are initially 
shared in the circumstances described above, changes to the contents of 
the mapping are nevertheless private to each process. The kernel 
accomplishes this using the copy-on-write technique (Section 24.2.2).
 This means that whenever a process attempts to modify the contents of a
 page, the kernel first creates a new, separate copy of that page for 
the process (and adjusts the process’s page tables). For this reason, a <tt>MAP_PRIVATE</tt> mapping is sometimes referred to as a <span class="docEmphasis">private, copy-on-write mapping</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Shared mapping</span> (<tt>MAP_SHARED</tt>):
 Modifications to the contents of the mapping are visible to other 
processes that share the same mapping and, for a file mapping, are 
carried through to the underlying file.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The
 two mapping attributes described above (file versus anonymous and 
private versus shared) can be combined in four different ways, as 
summarized in Table 49-1.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 49-1. Purposes of various types of memory mappings</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" rowspan="2" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom">Visibility of modifications</th><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" colspan="2" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom">Mapping type</th></tr><tr><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom">File</th><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom">Anonymous</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphStrong">Private</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Initializing memory from contents of file</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Memory allocation</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphStrong">Shared</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Memory-mapped I/O; sharing memory between processes (IPC)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Sharing memory between processes (IPC)</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">The four different types of memory mappings are created and used as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Private file mapping</span>:
 The contents of the mapping are initialized from a file region. 
Multiple processes mapping the same file initially share the same 
physical pages of memory, but the copy-on-write technique is employed, 
so that changes to the mapping by one process are invisible to other 
processes. The main use of this type of mapping is to initialize a 
region of memory from the contents of a file. Some common examples are 
initializing a process’s text and initialized data segments from the 
corresponding parts of a binary executable file or a shared library 
file.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Private anonymous mapping</span>: Each call to <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span>
 to create a private anonymous mapping yields a new mapping that is 
distinct from (i.e., does not share physical pages with) other anonymous
 mappings created by the same (or a different) process. Although a child
 process inherits its parent’s mappings, copy-on-write semantics ensure 
that, after the <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>,
 the parent and child don’t see changes made to the mapping by the other
 process. The primary purpose of private anonymous mappings is to 
allocate new (zero-filled) memory for a process (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">malloc()</span> employs <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> for this purpose when allocating large blocks of memory).</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Shared file mapping</span>:
 All processes mapping the same region of a file share the same physical
 pages of memory, which are initialized from a file region. 
Modifications to the contents of the mapping are carried through to the 
file. This type of mapping serves two purposes. First, it permits <span class="docEmphasis">memory-mapped I/O</span>.
 By this, we mean that a file is loaded into a region of the process’s 
virtual memory, and modifications to that memory are automatically 
written to the file. Thus, memory-mapped I/O provides an alternative to 
using <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>
 for performing file I/O. A second purpose of this type of mapping is to
 allow unrelated processes to share a region of memory in order to 
perform (fast) IPC in a manner similar to System V shared memory 
segments (Chapter 48).</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Shared anonymous mapping</span>: As with a private anonymous mapping, each call to <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span>
 to create a shared anonymous mapping creates a new, distinct mapping 
that doesn’t share pages with any other mapping. The difference is that 
the pages of the mapping are not copied-on-write. This means that when a
 child inherits the mapping after a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>,
 the parent and child share the same pages of RAM, and changes made to 
the contents of the mapping by one process are visible to the other 
process. Shared anonymous mappings allow IPC in a manner similar to 
System V shared memory segments, but only between related processes.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">We consider each of these types of mapping in more detail in the remainder of this chapter.</p><p class="docText">Mappings are lost when a process performs an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, but are inherited by the child of a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>. The mapping type (<tt>MAP_PRIVATE</tt> or <tt>MAP_SHARED</tt>) is also inherited.</p><p class="docText">Information about all of a process’s mappings is visible in the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/maps</tt> file, which we described in Section 48.5.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">One further use of <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span>
 is with POSIX shared memory objects, which allow a region of memory to 
be shared between unrelated processes without having to create an 
associated disk file (as is required for a shared file mapping). We 
describe POSIX shared memory objects in Chapter 54.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
