<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>49.2. Creating a Mapping: mmap()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">49.2. Creating a Mapping: <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span></h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> system call creates a new mapping in the calling process’s virtual address space.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/mman.h&gt;

void *<b>mmap</b>(void *<span class="docEmphasis">addr</span>, size_t <span class="docEmphasis">length</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">prot</span>, int
 <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, off_t <span class="docEmphasis">offset</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns starting address of mapping on success, or <tt>MAP_FAILED</tt> on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> argument indicates the virtual address at which the mapping is to be located. If we specify <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> as <tt>NULL</tt>,
 the kernel chooses a suitable address for the mapping. This is the 
preferred way of creating a mapping. Alternatively, we can specify a 
non-<tt>NULL</tt> value in <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span>,
 which the kernel takes as a hint about the address at which the mapping
 should be placed. In practice, the kernel will at the very least round 
the address to a nearby page boundary. In either case, the kernel will 
choose an address that doesn’t conflict with any existing mapping. (If 
the value <tt>MAP_FIXED</tt> is included in <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>, then <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> must be page-aligned. We describe this flag in Section 49.10.)</p><p class="docText">On success, <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> returns the starting address of the new mapping. On error, <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> returns <tt>MAP_FAILED</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On Linux (and on most other UNIX implementations), the <tt>MAP_FAILED</tt> constant equates to <span class="docEmphasis">((void *) -1)</span>. However, SUSv3 specifies this constant because the C standards can’t guarantee that <span class="docEmphasis">((void *) -1)</span> is distinct from a successful <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> return value.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">length</span> argument specifies the size of the mapping in bytes. Although <span class="docEmphasis">length</span> doesn’t need to be a multiple of the system page size (as returned by <span class="docEmphasis">sysconf(_SC_PAGESIZE)</span>), the kernel creates mappings in units of this size, so that <span class="docEmphasis">length</span> is, in effect, rounded up to the next multiple of the page size.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">prot</span> argument is a bit mask specifying the protection to be placed on the mapping. It can be either <tt>PROT_NONE</tt> or a combination (ORing) of any of the other three flags listed in Table 49-2.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 49-2. Memory protection values</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Value</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>PROT_NONE</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">The region may not be accessed</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>PROT_READ</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">The contents of the region can be read</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>PROT_WRITE</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">The contents of the region can be modified</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>PROT_EXEC</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">The contents of the region can be executed</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>
 argument is a bit mask of options controlling various aspects of the 
mapping operation. Exactly one of the following values must be included 
in this mask:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MAP_PRIVATE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Create
 a private mapping. Modifications to the contents of the region are not 
visible to other processes employing the same mapping, and, in the case 
of a file mapping, are not carried through to the underlying file.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MAP_SHARED</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Create
 a shared mapping. Modifications to the contents of the region are 
visible to other processes mapping the same region with the <tt>MAP_SHARED</tt>
 attribute and, in the case of a file mapping, are carried through to 
the underlying file. Updates to the file are not guaranteed to be 
immediate; see the discussion of the <span class="docEmphasis">msync()</span> system call in Section 49.5.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">Aside from <tt>MAP_PRIVATE</tt> and <tt>MAP_SHARED</tt>, other flag values can optionally be ORed in <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>. We discuss these flags in Section 49.6 and Section 49.10.</p><p class="docText">The remaining arguments, <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">offset</span>, are used with file mappings (they are ignored for anonymous mappings). The <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span> argument is a file descriptor identifying the file to be mapped. The <span class="docEmphasis">offset</span>
 argument specifies the starting point of the mapping in the file, and 
must be a multiple of the system page size. To map the entire file, we 
would specify <span class="docEmphasis">offset</span> as 0 and <span class="docEmphasis">length</span> as the size of the file. We say more about file mappings in Section 49.5.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E2DDM">49.2.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E6DDM">49.2.1.1. Memory protection in more detail</h5><p class="docText">As noted above, the <span class="docEmphasis">mmap() prot</span> argument specifies the protection on a new memory mapping. It can contain the value <tt>PROT_NONE</tt>, or a mask of one of more of the flags <tt>PROT_READ</tt>, <tt>PROT_WRITE</tt>, and <tt>PROT_EXEC</tt>.
 If a process attempts to access a memory region in a way that violates 
the protection on the region, then the kernel delivers the <tt>SIGSEGV</tt> signal to a process.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Although SUSv3 specifies that <tt>SIGSEGV</tt> should be used to signal memory protection violations, on some implementations, <tt>SIGBUS</tt> is used instead.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">One use of pages of memory marked <tt>PROT_NONE</tt>
 is as guard pages at the start or end of a region of memory that a 
process has allocated. If the process accidentally steps into one of the
 pages marked <tt>PROT_NONE</tt>, the kernel informs it of that fact by generating a <tt>SIGSEGV</tt> signal.</p><p class="docText">Memory
 protections reside in process-private virtual memory tables. Thus, 
different processes may map the same memory region with different 
protections.</p><p class="docText">Memory protection can be changed using the <span class="docEmphasis">mprotect()</span> system call (Section 50.1).</p><p class="docText">On some UNIX implementations, the actual protections placed on the pages of a mapping may not be exactly those specified in <span class="docEmphasis">prot</span>.
 In particular, limitations of the protection granularity of the 
underlying hardware (e.g., older x86-32 architectures) mean that, on 
many UNIX implementations, <tt>PROT_READ</tt> implies <tt>PROT_EXEC</tt> and vice versa, and on some implementations, specifying <tt>PROT_WRITE</tt> implies <tt>PROT_READ</tt>. However, applications should not rely on such behavior; <span class="docEmphasis">prot</span> should always specify exactly the memory protections that are required.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Modern x86-32 architectures provide hardware support for marking pages tables as <span class="docEmphasis">NX</span> (no execute), and, since kernel 2.6.8, Linux makes use of this feature to properly separate <tt>PROT_READ</tt> and <tt>PROT_EXEC</tt> permissions on Linux/x86-32.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ENIDM">49.2.1.2. Alignment restrictions specified in standards for <span class="docEmphasis">offset</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span></h5><p class="docText">SUSv3 specifies that the <span class="docEmphasis">offset</span> argument of <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> must be page-aligned, and that the <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> argument must also be page-aligned if <tt>MAP_FIXED</tt>
 is specified. Linux conforms to these requirements. However, it was 
later noted that the SUSv3 requirements differed from earlier standards,
 which imposed looser requirements on these arguments. The consequence 
of the SUSv3 wording was to (unnecessarily) render some formerly 
standards-conformant implementations nonconforming. SUSv4 returns to the
 looser requirement:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">An implementation may require that <span class="docEmphasis">offset</span> be a multiple of the system page size.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If <tt>MAP_FIXED</tt> is specified, then an implementation may require that <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> be page-aligned.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If <tt>MAP_FIXED</tt> is specified, and <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> is nonzero, then <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">offset</span> shall have the same remainder modulo the system page size.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">A similar situation arose for the <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> argument of <span class="docEmphasis">mprotect()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">msync()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">munmap()</span>.
 SUSv3 specified that this argument must be page-aligned. SUSv4 says 
that an implementation may require this argument to be page-aligned.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li></ul><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EALDM">49.2.1.3. Example program</h5><p class="docText">Example 49-1 demonstrates the use of <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> to create a private file mapping. This program is a simple version of <span class="docEmphasis">cat(1)</span>. It maps the (entire) file named in its command-line argument, and then writes the contents of the mapping to standard output.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ENLDM">Example 49-1. Using <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> to create a private file mapping</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>mmap/mmcat.c</b>
#include &lt;sys/mman.h&gt;
#include &lt;sys/stat.h&gt;
#include &lt;fcntl.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    char *addr;
    int fd;
    struct stat sb;

    if (argc != 2 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s file\n", argv[0]);

    fd = open(argv[1], O_RDONLY);
    if (fd == -1)
        errExit("open");

    /* Obtain the size of the file and use it to specify the size of
       the mapping and the size of the buffer to be written */

    if (fstat(fd, &amp;sb) == -1)
        errExit("fstat");

    addr = mmap(NULL, sb.st_size, PROT_READ, MAP_PRIVATE, fd, 0);
    if (addr == MAP_FAILED)
        errExit("mmap");

    if (write(STDOUT_FILENO, addr, sb.st_size) != sb.st_size)
        fatal("partial/failed write");
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>mmap/mmcat.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
