<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>49.3. Unmapping a Mapped Region: munmap()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">49.3. Unmapping a Mapped Region: <span class="docEmphasis">munmap()</span></h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">munmap()</span> system call performs the converse of <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span>, removing a mapping from the calling process’s virtual address space.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/mman.h&gt;

int <b>munmap</b>(void *<span class="docEmphasis">addr</span>, size_t <span class="docEmphasis">length</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span>
 argument is the starting address of the address range to be unmapped. 
It must be aligned to a page boundary. (SUSv3 specified that <span class="docEmphasis">addr must</span> be page-aligned. SUSv4 says that an implementation <span class="docEmphasis">may</span> require this argument to be page-aligned.)</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">length</span>
 argument is a nonnegative integer specifying the size (in bytes) of the
 region to be unmapped. The address range up to the next multiple of the
 system page size will be unmapped.</p><p class="docText">Commonly, we unmap an entire mapping. Thus, we specify <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> as the address returned by a previous call to <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span>, and specify the same <span class="docEmphasis">length</span> value as was used in the <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> call. Here’s an example:</p><pre>addr = mmap(NULL, length, PROT_READ | PROT_WRITE, MAP_PRIVATE, fd, 0);
if (addr == MAP_FAILED)
    errExit("mmap");

/* Code for working with mapped region */

if (munmap(addr, length) == -1)
    errExit("munmap");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Alternatively, we can unmap 
part of a mapping, in which case the mapping either shrinks or is cut in
 two, depending on where the unmapping occurs. It is also possible to 
specify an address range spanning several mappings, in which case all of
 the mappings are unmapped.</p><p class="docText">If there are no mappings in the address range specified by <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">length</span>, then <span class="docEmphasis">munmap()</span> has no effect, and returns 0 (for success).</p><p class="docText">During
 unmapping, the kernel removes any memory locks that the process holds 
for the specified address range. (Memory locks are established using <span class="docEmphasis">mlock()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">mlockall()</span>, as described in Section 50.2.)</p><p class="docText">All of a process’s mappings are automatically unmapped when it terminates or performs an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>.</p><p class="docText">To ensure that the contents of a shared file mapping are written to the underlying file, a call to <span class="docEmphasis">msync()</span> (Section 49.5) should be made before unmapping a mapping with <span class="docEmphasis">munmap()</span>.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
