<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>49.5. Synchronizing a Mapped Region: msync()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">49.5. Synchronizing a Mapped Region: <span class="docEmphasis">msync()</span></h3><p class="docText">The kernel automatically carries modifications of the contents of a <tt>MAP_SHARED</tt>
 mapping through to the underlying file, but, by default, provides no 
guarantees about when such synchronization will occur. (SUSv3 doesn’t 
require an implementation to provide such guarantees.)</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">msync()</span>
 system call gives an application explicit control over when a shared 
mapping is synchronized with the mapped file. Synchronizing a mapping 
with the underlying file is useful in various scenarios. For example, to
 ensure data integrity, a database application may call <span class="docEmphasis">msync()</span> to force data to be written to the disk. Calling <span class="docEmphasis">msync()</span> also allows an application to ensure that updates to a writable mapping are visible to some other process that performs a <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> on the file.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/mman.h&gt;

int <b>msync</b>(void *<span class="docEmphasis">addr</span>, size_t <span class="docEmphasis">length</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">length</span> arguments to <span class="docEmphasis">msync()</span> specify the starting address and size of the memory region to be synchronized. The address specified in <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> must be page-aligned, and <span class="docEmphasis">len</span> is rounded up to the next multiple of the system page size. (SUSv3 specified that <span class="docEmphasis">addr must</span> be page-aligned. SUSv4 says that an implementation <span class="docEmphasis">may</span> require this argument to be page-aligned.)</p><p class="docText">Possible values for the <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> argument include one of the following:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MS_SYNC</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Perform a synchronous file write. The call blocks until all modified pages of the memory region have been written to the disk.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MS_ASYNC</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Perform
 an asynchronous file write. The modified pages of the memory region are
 written to the disk at some later point and are immediately made 
visible to other processes performing a <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> on the corresponding file region.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">Another way of distinguishing these two values is to say that after an <tt>MS_SYNC</tt> operation, the memory region is synchronized with the disk, while after an <tt>MS_ASYNC</tt> operation, the memory region is merely synchronized with the kernel buffer cache.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">If we take no further action after an <tt>MS_ASYNC</tt>
 operation, then the modified pages in the memory region will eventually
 be flushed as part of the automatic buffer flushing performed by the <span class="docEmphasis">pdflush</span> kernel thread (<span class="docEmphasis">kupdated</span>
 in Linux 2.4 and earlier). On Linux, there are two (nonstandard) 
methods of initiating the output sooner. We can follow the call to <span class="docEmphasis">msync()</span> with a call to <span class="docEmphasis">fsync()</span> (or <span class="docEmphasis">fdatasync()</span>)
 on the file descriptor corresponding to the mapping. This call will 
block until the buffer cache is synchronized with the disk. 
Alternatively, we can initiate asynchronous write out of the pages using
 the <span class="docEmphasis">posix_fadvise()</span> <tt>POSIX_FADV_DONTNEED</tt> operation. (The Linux-specific details in these two cases are not specified by SUSv3.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">One other value can additionally be specified for <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MS_INVALIDATE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Invalidate
 cached copies of mapped data. After any modified pages in the memory 
region have been synchronized with the file, all pages of the memory 
region that are inconsistent with the underlying file data are marked as
 invalid. When next referenced, the contents of the pages will be copied
 from the corresponding locations in the file. As a consequence, any 
updates that have been made to the file by another process are made 
visible in the memory region.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">Like many other modern UNIX implementations, Linux provides a so-called <span class="docEmphasis">unified virtual memory</span>
 system. This means that, where possible, memory mappings and blocks of 
the buffer cache share the same pages of physical memory. Thus, the 
views of a file obtained via a mapping and via I/O system calls (<span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>, and so on) are always consistent, and the only use of <span class="docEmphasis">msync()</span> is to force the contents of a mapped region to be flushed to disk.</p><p class="docText">However,
 a unified virtual memory system is not required by SUSv3 and is not 
employed on all UNIX implementations. On such systems, a call to <span class="docEmphasis">msync()</span> is required to make changes to the contents of a mapping visible to other processes that <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> the file, and the <tt>MS_INVALIDATE</tt>
 flag is required to perform the converse action of making writes to the
 file by another process visible in the mapped region. Multiprocess 
applications that employ both <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> and I/O system calls to operate on the same file should be designed to make appropriate use of <span class="docEmphasis">msync()</span> if they are to be portable to systems that don’t have a unified virtual memory system.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
