<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>49.6. Additional mmap() Flags</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">49.6. Additional <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> Flags</h3><p class="docText">In addition to <tt>MAP_PRIVATE</tt> and <tt>MAP_SHARED</tt>, Linux allows a number of other values to be included (ORed) in the <span class="docEmphasis">mmap() flags</span> argument. Table 49-3 summarizes these values. Other than <tt>MAP_PRIVATE</tt> and <tt>MAP_SHARED</tt>, only the <tt>MAP_FIXED</tt> flag is specified in SUSv3.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 49-3. Bit-mask values for the <span class="docEmphasis">mmap() flags</span> argument</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Value</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Description</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">SUSv3</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MAP_ANONYMOUS</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Create an anonymous mapping</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MAP_FIXED</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Interpret <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> argument exactly (Section 49.10)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MAP_LOCKED</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Lock mapped pages into memory (since Linux 2.6)</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MAP_HUGETLB</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Create a mapping that uses huge pages (since Linux 2.6.32)</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MAP_NORESERVE</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Control reservation of swap space (Section 49.9)</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MAP_PRIVATE</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Modifications to mapped data are private</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MAP_POPULATE</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Populate the pages of a mapping (since Linux 2.6)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MAP_SHARED</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Modifications to mapped data are visible to other processes and propagated to underlying file (converse of <tt>MAP_PRIVATE</tt>)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>MAP_UNINITIALIZED</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Don’t clear an anonymous mapping (since Linux 2.6.33)</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">The following list provides further details on the <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> values listed in Table 49-3 (other than <tt>MAP_PRIVATE</tt> and <tt>MAP_SHARED</tt>, which have already been discussed):</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MAP_ANONYMOUS</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Create an anonymous mapping—that is, a mapping that is not backed by a file. We describe this flag further in Section 49.7.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MAP_FIXED</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">We describe this flag in Section 49.10.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MAP_HUGETLB</span></span> (since Linux 2.6.32)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This flag serves the same purpose for <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> as the <tt>SHM_HUGETLB</tt> flag serves for System V shared memory segments. See Section 48.2.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MAP_LOCKED</span></span> (since Linux 2.6)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Preload and lock the mapped pages into memory in the manner of <span class="docEmphasis">mlock()</span>. We describe the privileges required to use this flag and the limits governing its operation in Section 50.2.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MAP_NORESERVE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This flag is used to control whether reservation of swap space for the mapping is performed in advance. See Section 49.9 for details.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MAP_POPULATE</span></span> (since Linux 2.6)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Populate
 the pages of a mapping. For a file mapping, this will perform 
read-ahead on the file. This means that later accesses of the contents 
of the mapping won’t be blocked by page faults (assuming that memory 
pressure has not in the meantime caused the pages to be swapped out).</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MAP_UNINITIALIZED</span></span> (since Linux 2.6.33)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Specifying
 this flag prevents the pages of an anonymous mapping from being zeroed.
 It provides a performance benefit, but carries a security risk, because
 the allocated pages may contain sensitive information left by a 
previous process. This flag is thus only intended for use on embedded 
systems, where performance may be critical, and the entire system is 
under the control of the embedded application(s). This flag is only 
honored if the kernel was configured with the <tt>CONFIG_MMAP_ALLOW_UNINITIALIZED</tt> option.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
</body>
</html>
