<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>49.7. Anonymous Mappings</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">49.7. Anonymous Mappings</h3><p class="docText">An <span class="docEmphasis">anonymous mapping</span>
 is one that doesn’t have a corresponding file. In this section, we show
 how to create anonymous mappings, and look at the purposes served by 
private and shared anonymous mappings.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EQCDM">49.7.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EUCDM">49.7.1.1. <tt>MAP_ANONYMOUS</tt> and <tt>/dev/zero</tt></h5><p class="docText">On Linux, there are two different, equivalent methods of creating an anonymous mapping with <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span>:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Specify <tt>MAP_ANONYMOUS</tt> in <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> and specify <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span> as -1. (On Linux, the value of <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span> is ignored when <tt>MAP_ANONYMOUS</tt> is specified. However, some UNIX implementations require fd to be -1 when employing <tt>MAP_ANONYMOUS</tt>, and portable applications should ensure that they do this.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">We must define either the <tt>_BSD_SOURCE</tt> or the <tt>_SVID_SOURCE</tt> feature test macros to get the definition of <tt>MAP_ANONYMOUS</tt> from <tt>&lt;sys/mman.h&gt;</tt>. Linux provides the constant <tt>MAP_ANON</tt> as a synonym for <tt>MAP_ANONYMOUS</tt> for compatibility with some other UNIX implementations using this alternative name.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li><li><p class="docList">Open the <tt>/dev/zero</tt> device file and pass the resulting file descriptor to <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText"><tt>/dev/zero</tt>
 is a virtual device that always returns zeros when we read from it. 
Writes to this device are always discarded. A common use of <tt>/dev/zero</tt> is to populate a file with zeros (e.g., using the <span class="docEmphasis">dd(1)</span> command).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li></ul><p class="docText">With both the <tt>MAP_ANONYMOUS</tt> and the <tt>/dev/zero</tt> techniques, the bytes of the resulting mapping are initialized to 0. For both techniques, the <span class="docEmphasis">offset</span>
 argument is ignored (since there is no underlying file in which to 
specify an offset). We show examples of each technique shortly.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <tt>MAP_ANONYMOUS</tt> and <tt>/dev/zero</tt>
 techniques are not specified in SUSv3, although most UNIX 
implementations support one or both of them. The reason for the 
existence of two different techniques with the same semantics is that 
one (<tt>MAP_ANONYMOUS</tt>) derives from BSD, while the other (<tt>/dev/zero</tt>) derives from System V.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EBGDM">49.7.1.2. <tt>MAP_PRIVATE</tt> anonymous mappings</h5><p class="docText"><tt>MAP_PRIVATE</tt> anonymous mappings are used to allocate blocks of process-private memory initialized to 0. We can use the <tt>/dev/zero</tt> technique to create a <tt>MAP_PRIVATE</tt> anonymous mapping as follows:</p><pre>fd = open("/dev/zero", O_RDWR);
if (fd == -1)
    errExit("open");
addr = mmap(NULL, length, PROT_READ | PROT_WRITE, MAP_PRIVATE, fd, 0);
if (addr == MAP_FAILED)
    errExit("mmap");</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> implementation of <span class="docEmphasis">malloc()</span> uses <tt>MAP_PRIVATE</tt> anonymous mappings to allocate blocks of memory larger than <tt>MMAP_THRESHOLD</tt> bytes. This makes it possible to efficiently deallocate such blocks (via <span class="docEmphasis">munmap()</span>) if they are later given to <span class="docEmphasis">free()</span>. (It also reduces the possibility of memory fragmentation when repeatedly allocating and deallocating large blocks of memory.) <tt>MMAP_THRESHOLD</tt> is 128 kB by default, but this parameter is adjustable via the <span class="docEmphasis">mallopt()</span> library function.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E3HDM">49.7.1.3. <tt>MAP_SHARED</tt> anonymous mappings</h5><p class="docText">A <tt>MAP_SHARED</tt>
 anonymous mapping allows related processes (e.g., parent and child) to 
share a region of memory without needing a corresponding mapped file.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText"><tt>MAP_SHARED</tt> anonymous mappings are available only with Linux 2.4 and later.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">We can use the <tt>MAP_ANONYMOUS</tt> technique to create a <tt>MAP_SHARED</tt> anonymous mapping as follows:</p><pre>addr = mmap(NULL, length, PROT_READ | PROT_WRITE,
            MAP_SHARED | MAP_ANONYMOUS, -1, 0);
if (addr == MAP_FAILED)
    errExit("mmap");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If the above code is followed by a call to <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, then, because the child produced by <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> inherits the mapping, both processes share the memory region.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EHJDM">49.7.1.4. Example program</h5><p class="docText">The program in Example 49-3 demonstrates the use of either <tt>MAP_ANONYMOUS</tt> or <tt>/dev/zero</tt> to share a mapped region between parent and child processes. The choice of technique is determined by whether <tt>USE_MAP_ANON</tt> is defined when compiling the program. The parent initializes an integer in the shared region to 1 prior to calling <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>.
 The child then increments the shared integer and exits, while the 
parent waits for the child to exit and then prints the value of the 
integer. When we run this program, we see the following:</p><pre>$ <b>./anon_mmap</b>
Child started, value = 1
In parent, value = 2</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E1LDM">Example 49-3. Sharing an anonymous mapping between parent and child processes</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>mmap/anon_mmap.c</b>
#ifdef USE_MAP_ANON
#define _BSD_SOURCE             /* Get MAP_ANONYMOUS definition */
#endif
#include &lt;sys/wait.h&gt;
#include &lt;sys/mman.h&gt;
#include &lt;fcntl.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int *addr;                  /* Pointer to shared memory region */

#ifdef USE_MAP_ANON             /* Use MAP_ANONYMOUS */
    addr = mmap(NULL, sizeof(int), PROT_READ | PROT_WRITE,
                MAP_SHARED | MAP_ANONYMOUS, -1, 0);
    if (addr == MAP_FAILED)
        errExit("mmap");

#else                           /* Map /dev/zero */
    int fd;

    fd = open("/dev/zero", O_RDWR);
    if (fd == -1)
        errExit("open");

    addr = mmap(NULL, sizeof(int), PROT_READ | PROT_WRITE, MAP_SHARED, fd, 0);
    if (addr == MAP_FAILED)
        errExit("mmap");

    if (close(fd) == -1)        /* No longer needed */
        errExit("close");
#endif

    *addr = 1;                  /* Initialize integer in mapped region */

    switch (fork()) {           /* Parent and child share mapping */
    case -1:
        errExit("fork");

    case 0:                     /* Child: increment shared integer and exit */
        printf("Child started, value = %d\n", *addr);
        (*addr)++;

        if (munmap(addr, sizeof(int)) == -1)
            errExit("munmap");
        exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);

    default:                    /* Parent: wait for child to terminate */
        if (wait(NULL) == -1)
            errExit("wait");
        printf("In parent, value = %d\n", *addr);
        if (munmap(addr, sizeof(int)) == -1)
            errExit("munmap");
        exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
    }
}
      <b>mmap/anon_mmap.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
