<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>49.8. Remapping a Mapped Region: mremap()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">49.8. Remapping a Mapped Region: <span class="docEmphasis">mremap()</span></h3><p class="docText">On
 most UNIX implementations, once a mapping has been created, its 
location and size can’t be changed. However, Linux provides the 
(nonportable) <span class="docEmphasis">mremap()</span> system call, which permits such changes.</p><pre>#define _GNU_SOURCE
#include &lt;sys/mman.h&gt;

void *<b>mremap</b>(void *<span class="docEmphasis">old_address</span>, size_t <span class="docEmphasis">old_size</span>, size_t <span class="docEmphasis">new_size</span>,
 int <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>, ...);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns starting address of remapped region on success, or <tt>MAP_FAILED</tt> on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">old_address</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">old_size</span> arguments specify the location and size of an existing mapping that we wish to expand or shrink. The address specified in <span class="docEmphasis">old_address</span> must be page-aligned, and is normally a value returned by a previous call to <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span>. The desired new size of the mapping is specified in <span class="docEmphasis">new_size</span>. The values specified in <span class="docEmphasis">old_size</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">new_size</span> are both rounded up to the next multiple of the system page size.</p><p class="docText">While
 carrying out the remapping, the kernel may relocate the mapping within 
the process’s virtual address space. Whether or not this is permitted is
 controlled by the <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> argument, which is a bit mask that may either be 0 or include the following values:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MREMAP_MAYMOVE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">If
 this flag is specified, then, as space requirements dictate, the kernel
 may relocate the mapping within the process’s virtual address space. If
 this flag is not specified, and there is insufficient space to expand 
the mapping at the current location, then the error <tt>ENOMEM</tt> results.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MREMAP_FIXED</span></span> (since Linux 2.4)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This flag can be used only in conjunction with <tt>MREMAP_MAYMOVE</tt>. It serves a purpose for <span class="docEmphasis">mremap()</span> that is analogous to that served by <tt>MAP_FIXED</tt> for <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> (Section 49.10). If this flag is specified, then <span class="docEmphasis">mremap()</span> takes an additional argument, <span class="docEmphasis">void *new_address</span>,
 that specifies a page-aligned address to which the mapping should be 
moved. Any previous mapping in the address range specified by <span class="docEmphasis">new_address</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">new_size</span> is unmapped.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">On success, <span class="docEmphasis">mremap()</span> returns the starting address of the mapping. Since (if the <tt>MREMAP_MAYMOVE</tt>
 flag is specified) this address may be different from the previous 
starting address, pointers into the region may cease to be valid. 
Therefore, applications that use <span class="docEmphasis">mremap()</span> should use only offsets (not absolute pointers) when referring to addresses in the mapped region (see Section 48.6).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On Linux, the <span class="docEmphasis">realloc()</span> function uses <span class="docEmphasis">mremap()</span> to efficiently reallocate large blocks of memory that <span class="docEmphasis">malloc()</span> previously allocated using <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> <tt>MAP_ANONYMOUS</tt>. (We mentioned this feature of the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc malloc()</span> implementation in Section 49.7.) Using <span class="docEmphasis">mremap()</span> for this task makes it possible to avoid copying of bytes during the reallocation.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
