<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>49.9. MAP_NORESERVE and Swap Space Overcommitting</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">49.9. <tt>MAP_NORESERVE</tt> and Swap Space Overcommitting</h3><p class="docText">Some
 applications create large (usually private anonymous) mappings, but use
 only a small part of the mapped region. For example, certain types of 
scientific applications allocate a very large array, but operate on only
 a few widely separated elements of the array (a so-called <span class="docEmphasis">sparse array</span>).</p><p class="docText">If
 the kernel always allocated (or reserved) enough swap space for the 
whole of such mappings, then a lot of swap space would potentially be 
wasted. Instead, the kernel can reserve swap space for the pages of a 
mapping only as they are actually required (i.e., when the application 
accesses a page). This approach is called <span class="docEmphasis">lazy swap reservation</span>, and has the advantage that the total virtual memory used by applications can exceed the total size of RAM plus swap space.</p><p class="docText">To
 put things another way, lazy swap reservation allows swap space to be 
overcommitted. This works fine, as long as all processes don’t attempt 
to access the entire range of their mappings. However, if all 
applications do attempt to access the full range of their mappings, RAM 
and swap space will be exhausted. In this situation, the kernel reduces 
memory pressure by killing one or more of the processes on the system. 
Ideally, the kernel attempts to select the process causing the memory 
problems (see the discussion of the <span class="docEmphasis">OOM killer</span>
 below), but this isn’t guaranteed. For this reason, we may choose to 
prevent lazy swap reservation, instead forcing the system to allocate 
all of the necessary swap space when the mapping is created.</p><p class="docText">How the kernel handles reservation of swap space is controlled by the use of the <tt>MAP_NORESERVE</tt> flag when calling <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span>, and via <tt>/proc</tt> interfaces that affect the system-wide operation of swap space overcommitting. These factors are summarized in Table 49-4.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 49-4. Handling of swap space reservation during <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span></h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" rowspan="2" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom"><tt>overcommit_memory</tt> value</th><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" colspan="2" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom"><tt>MAP_NORESERVE</tt> specified in <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> call?</th></tr><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">No</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Yes</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">0</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Deny obvious overcommits</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Allow overcommits</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">1</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Allow overcommits</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Allow overcommits</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">2 (since Linux 2.6)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" colspan="2" valign="top">Strict overcommitting</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">The Linux-specific <tt>/proc/sys/vm/overcommit_memory</tt>
 file contains an integer value that controls the kernel’s handling of 
swap space overcommits. Linux versions before 2.6 differentiated only 
two values in this file: 0, meaning deny obvious overcommits (subject to
 the use of the <tt>MAP_NORESERVE</tt> flag), and greater than 0, meaning that overcommits should be permitted in all cases.</p><p class="docText">Denying
 obvious overcommits means that new mappings whose size doesn’t exceed 
the amount of currently available free memory are permitted. Existing 
allocations may be overcommitted (since they may not be using all of the
 pages that they mapped).</p><p class="docText">Since Linux 2.6, a value of 1 has the same meaning as a positive value in earlier kernels, but the value 2 (or greater) causes <span class="docEmphasis">strict overcommitting</span> to be employed. In this case, the kernel performs strict accounting on all <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> allocations and limits the system-wide total of all such allocations to be less than or equal to:</p><pre>[swap size] + [RAM size] * overcommit_ratio / 100</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>overcommit_ratio</tt> value is an integer—expressing a percentage—contained in the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/sys/vm/overcommit_ratio</tt>
 file. The default value contained in this file is 50, meaning that the 
kernel can overallocate up to 50% of the size of the system’s RAM, and 
this will be successful, as long as not all processes try to use their 
full allocation.</p><p class="docText">Note that overcommit monitoring comes into play only for the following types of mappings:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">private
 writable mappings (both file and anonymous mappings), for which the 
swap “cost” of the mapping is equal to the size of the mapping for each 
process that employs the mapping; and</p></li><li><p class="docList">shared
 anonymous mappings, for which the swap “cost” of the mapping is the 
size of the mapping (since all processes share that mapping).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Reserving
 swap space for a read-only private mapping is unnecessary: since the 
contents of the mapping can’t be modified, there is no need to employ 
swap space. Swap space is also not required for shared file mappings, 
because the mapped file itself acts as the swap space for the mapping.</p><p class="docText">When a child process inherits a mapping across a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, it inherits the <tt>MAP_NORESERVE</tt> setting for the mapping. The <tt>MAP_NORESERVE</tt> flag is not specified in SUSv3, but it is supported on a few other UNIX implementations.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In this section, we have discussed how a call to <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> may fail to increase the address space of a process because of the system limitations on RAM and swap space. A call to <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> can also fail because it encounters the per-process <tt>RLIMIT_AS</tt> resource limit (described in Section 36.3), which places an upper limit on the size of the address space of the calling process.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ELKDM">49.9.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EPKDM">49.9.1.1. The OOM killer</h5><p class="docText">Above,
 we noted that when we employ lazy swap reservation, memory may become 
exhausted if applications attempt to employ the entire range of their 
mappings. In this case, the kernel relieves memory exhaustion by killing
 processes.</p><p class="docText">The
 kernel code dedicated to selecting a process to kill when memory is 
exhausted is commonly known as the out-of-memory (OOM) killer. The OOM 
killer tries to choose the best process to kill in order to relieve the 
memory exhaustion, where “best” is determined by a range of factors. For
 example, the more memory a process is consuming, the more likely it 
will be a candidate for the OOM killer. Other factors that increase a 
process’s likelihood of selection are forking to create many child 
processes and having a low nice value (i.e., one that is greater than 
0). The kernel disfavors killing the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">processes that are privileged, since they are probably performing important tasks;</p></li><li><p class="docList">processes that are performing raw device access, since killing them may leave the device in an unusable state; and</p></li><li><p class="docList">processes
 that have been running for a long time or have consumed a lot of CPU, 
since killing them would result in a lot of lost “work.”</p></li></ul><p class="docText">To kill the selected process, the OOM killer delivers a <tt>SIGKILL</tt> signal.</p><p class="docText">The Linux-specific <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/oom_score</tt>
 file, available since kernel 2.6.11, shows the weighting that the 
kernel gives to a process if it is necessary to invoke the OOM killer. 
The greater the value in this file, the more likely the process is to be
 selected, if necessary, by the OOM killer. The Linux-specific <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/oom_adj</tt> file, also available since kernel 2.6.11, can be used to influence the <tt>oom_score</tt> of a process. This file can be set to any value in the range -16 to +15, where negative values decrease the <tt>oom_score</tt>
 and positive values increase it. The special value -17 removes the 
process altogether as a candidate for selection by the OOM killer. For 
further details, see the <span class="docEmphasis">proc(5)</span> manual page.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
