<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>49.10. The MAP_FIXED Flag</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">49.10. The <tt>MAP_FIXED</tt> Flag</h3><p class="docText">Specifying <tt>MAP_FIXED</tt> in the <span class="docEmphasis">mmap() flags</span> argument forces the kernel to interpret the address in <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> exactly, rather than take it as a hint. If we specify <tt>MAP_FIXED</tt>, <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> must be page-aligned.</p><p class="docText">Generally, a portable application should omit the use of <tt>MAP_FIXED</tt>, and specify <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> as <tt>NULL</tt>,
 which allows the system to choose the address at which to place the 
mapping. The reasons for this are the same as those that we outlined in Section 48.3 when explaining why it usually preferable to specify <span class="docEmphasis">shmaddr</span> as <tt>NULL</tt> when attaching a System V shared memory segment using <span class="docEmphasis">shmat()</span>.</p><p class="docText">There is, however, one situation where a portable application might use <tt>MAP_FIXED</tt>. If <tt>MAP_FIXED</tt> is specified when calling <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span>, and the memory region beginning at <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> and running for <span class="docEmphasis">length</span>
 bytes overlaps the pages of any previous mapping, then the overlapped 
pages are replaced by the new mapping. We can use this feature to 
portably map multiple parts of a file (or files) into a contiguous 
region of memory, as follows:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Use <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> to create an anonymous mapping (Section 49.7). In the <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> call, we specify <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> as <tt>NULL</tt> and don’t specify the <tt>MAP_FIXED</tt> flag. This allows the kernel to choose an address for the mapping.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Use a series of <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> calls specifying <tt>MAP_FIXED</tt> to map (i.e., overlay) file regions into different parts of the mapping created in the preceding step.</p></div></li></ol></div><p class="docText">Although we could skip the first step, and use a series of <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> <tt>MAP_FIXED</tt>
 operations to create a set of contiguous mappings at an address range 
selected by the application, this approach is less portable than 
performing both steps. As noted above, a portable application should 
avoid trying to create a new mapping at a fixed address. The first step 
avoids the portability problem, because we let the kernel select a 
contiguous address range, and then create new mappings within that 
address range.</p><p class="docText">From Linux 2.6 onward, the <span class="docEmphasis">remap_file_pages()</span> system call, which we describe in the next section, can also be used to achieve the same effect. However, the use of <tt>MAP_FIXED</tt> is more portable than <span class="docEmphasis">remap_file_pages()</span>, which is Linux-specific.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
