<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>49.12. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">49.12. Summary</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> system call creates a new memory mapping in the calling process’s virtual address space. The <span class="docEmphasis">munmap()</span> system call performs the converse operation, removing a mapping from a process’s address space.</p><p class="docText">A
 mapping may be of two types: file-based or anonymous. A file mapping 
maps the contents of a file region into the process’s virtual address 
space. An anonymous mapping (created by using the <tt>MAP_ANONYMOUS</tt> flag or by mapping <tt>/dev/zero</tt>) doesn’t have a corresponding file region; the bytes of the mapping are initialized to 0.</p><p class="docText">Mappings can be either private (<tt>MAP_PRIVATE</tt>) or shared (<tt>MAP_SHARED</tt>).
 This distinction determines the visibility of changes made to the 
shared memory, and, in the case of file mappings, determines whether the
 kernel propagates changes to the contents of the mapping to the 
underlying file. When a process maps a file with the <tt>MAP_PRIVATE</tt>
 flag, any changes it makes to the contents of the mapping are not 
visible to other processes and are not carried through to the mapped 
file. A <tt>MAP_SHARED</tt> file mapping is the converse—changes to the mapping are visible to other processes and are carried through to the mapped file.</p><p class="docText">Although the kernel automatically propagates changes to the contents of a <tt>MAP_SHARED</tt> mapping to the underlying file, it doesn’t provide any guarantees about when this is done. An application can use the <span class="docEmphasis">msync()</span> system call to explicitly control when the contents of a mapping are synchronized with the mapped file.</p><p class="docText">Memory mappings serve a variety of uses, including:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">allocating process-private memory (private anonymous mappings);</p></li><li><p class="docList">initializing the contents of the text and initialized data segments of a process (private file mappings);</p></li><li><p class="docList">sharing memory between processes related via <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> (shared anonymous mappings); and</p></li><li><p class="docList">performing memory-mapped I/O, optionally combined with memory sharing between unrelated processes (shared file mappings).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Two signals may come into play when accessing the contents of a mapping. <tt>SIGSEGV</tt>
 is generated if we attempt access in a manner that violates the 
protections on the mapping (or if we access any currently unmapped 
address). <tt>SIGBUS</tt> is generated for 
file-based mappings if we access a part of the mapping for which no 
corresponding region exists in the file (i.e., the mapping is larger 
than the underlying file).</p><p class="docText">Swap
 space overcommitting allows the system to allocate more memory to 
processes than is actually available in RAM and swap space. 
Overcommitting is possible because, typically, each process does not 
make full use of its allocation. Overcommitting can be controlled on a 
per-<span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> basis using the <tt>MAP_NORESERVE</tt> flag, and on a system-wide basis using <tt>/proc</tt> files.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mremap()</span> system call allows an existing mapping to be resized. The <span class="docEmphasis">remap_file_pages()</span> system call allows the creation of nonlinear file mappings.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4IDM">49.12.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EBJDM">49.12.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">Information about the implementation of <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> on Linux can be found in [Bovet &amp; Cesati, 2005]. Information about the implementation of <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span>
 on other UNIX systems can be found in [McKusick et al., 1996] (BSD), 
[Goodheart &amp; Cox, 1994] (System V Release 4), and [Vahalia, 1996] 
(System V Release 4).</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
