<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 50. Virtual Memory Operations</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0EBIDM">Chapter 50. Virtual Memory Operations</h2><p class="docText">This chapter looks at various system calls that perform operations on a process’s virtual address space:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">mprotect()</span> system call changes the protection on a region of virtual memory.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">mlock()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">mlockall()</span> system calls lock a region of virtual memory into physical memory, thus preventing it from being swapped out.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">mincore()</span> system call allows a process to determine whether the pages in a region of virtual memory are resident in physical memory.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">madvise()</span> system call allows a process to advise the kernel about its future patterns of usage of a virtual memory region.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Some of these system calls find particular use in conjunction with shared memory regions (Chapter 48, Chapter 49, and Chapter 54), but they can be applied to any region of a process’s virtual memory.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The
 techniques described in this chapter are not in fact about IPC at all, 
but we include them in this part of the book because they are sometimes 
used with shared memory.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
