<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>50.2. Memory Locking: mlock() and mlockall()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">50.2. Memory Locking: <span class="docEmphasis">mlock()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">mlockall()</span></h3><p class="docText">In
 some applications, it is useful to lock part or all of a process’s 
virtual memory so that it is guaranteed to always be in physical memory.
 One reason for doing this is to improve performance. Accesses to locked
 pages are guaranteed never to be delayed by a page fault. This is 
useful for applications that must ensure rapid response times.</p><p class="docText">Another
 reason for locking memory is security. If a virtual memory page 
containing sensitive data is never swapped out, then no copy of the page
 is ever written to the disk. If the page was written to the disk, it 
could, in theory, be read directly from the disk device at some later 
time. (An attacker could deliberately engineer this situation by running
 a program that consumes a large amount of memory, thus forcing the 
memory of other processes to be swapped out to disk.) Reading 
information from the swap space could even be done after the process has
 terminated, since the kernel makes no guarantees about zeroing out the 
data held in swap space. (Normally, only privileged processes would be 
able to read from the swap device.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The
 suspend mode on laptop computers, as well some desktop systems, saves a
 copy of a system’s RAM to disk, regardless of memory locks.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">In
 this section, we look at the system calls used for locking and 
unlocking part or all of a process’s virtual memory. However, before 
doing this, we first look at a resource limit that governs memory 
locking.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EMKDM">50.2.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EQKDM">50.2.1.1. The <tt>RLIMIT_MEMLOCK</tt> resource limit</h5><p class="docText">In Section 36.3, we briefly described the <tt>RLIMIT_MEMLOCK</tt>
 limit, which defines a limit on the number of bytes that a process can 
lock into memory. We now consider this limit in more detail.</p><p class="docText">In Linux kernels before 2.6.9, only privileged processes (<tt>CAP_IPC_LOCK</tt>) can lock memory, and the <tt>RLIMIT_MEMLOCK</tt> soft resource limit places an upper limit on the number of bytes that a privileged process can lock.</p><p class="docText">Starting
 with Linux 2.6.9, changes to the memory locking model allow 
unprivileged processes to lock small amounts of memory. This is useful 
for an application that needs to place a small piece of sensitive 
information in locked memory in order to ensure that it is never written
 to the swap space on disk; for example, <span class="docEmphasis">gpg</span> does this with pass phrases. As a result of these changes:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">no limits are placed on the amount of memory that a privileged process can lock (i.e., <tt>RLIMIT_MEMLOCK</tt> is ignored); and</p></li><li><p class="docList">an unprivileged process is now able to lock memory up to the soft limit defined by <tt>RLIMIT_MEMLOCK</tt>.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The default value for both the soft and hard <tt>RLIMIT_MEMLOCK</tt> limits is 8 pages (i.e., 32,768 bytes on x86-32).</p><p class="docText">The <tt>RLIMIT_MEMLOCK</tt> limit affects:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">mlock()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">mlockall()</span>;</p></li><li><p class="docList">the <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> <tt>MAP_LOCKED</tt> flag, which is used to lock a memory mapping when it is created, as described in Section 49.6; and</p></li><li><p class="docList">the <span class="docEmphasis">shmctl()</span> <tt>SHM_LOCK</tt> operation, which is used to lock System V shared memory segments, as described in Section 48.7.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Since virtual memory is managed in units of pages, memory locks apply to complete pages. When performing limit checks, the <tt>RLIMIT_MEMLOCK</tt> limit is rounded <span class="docEmphasis">down</span> to the nearest multiple of the system page size.</p><p class="docText">Although this resource limit has a single (soft) value, in effect, it defines two separate limits:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">For <span class="docEmphasis">mlock()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">mlockall()</span>, and the <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> <tt>MAP_LOCKED</tt> operation, <tt>RLIMIT_MEMLOCK</tt> defines a per-process limit on the number of bytes of its virtual address space that a process may lock.</p></li><li><p class="docList">For the <span class="docEmphasis">shmctl()</span> <tt>SHM_LOCK</tt> operation, <tt>RLIMIT_MEMLOCK</tt>
 defines a per-user limit on the number of bytes in shared memory 
segments that may be locked by the real user ID of this process. When a 
process performs a <span class="docEmphasis">shmctl()</span> <tt>SHM_LOCK</tt>
 operation, the kernel checks the total number of bytes of System V 
shared memory that are already recorded as being locked by the real user
 ID of the calling process. If the size of the to-be-locked segment 
would not push that total over the process’s <tt>RLIMIT_MEMLOCK</tt> limit, the operation succeeds.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The reason <tt>RLIMIT_MEMLOCK</tt>
 has different semantics for System V shared memory is that a shared 
memory segment can continue to exist even when it is not attached by any
 process. (It is removed only after an explicit <span class="docEmphasis">shmctl()</span> <tt>IPC_RMID</tt> operation, and then only after all processes have detached it from their address space.)</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E3PDM">50.2.1.2. Locking and unlocking memory regions</h5><p class="docText">A process can use <span class="docEmphasis">mlock()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">munlock()</span> to lock and unlock regions of memory.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/mman.h&gt;

int <b>mlock</b>(void *<span class="docEmphasis">addr</span>, size_t <span class="docEmphasis">length</span>);
int <b>munlock</b>(void *<span class="docEmphasis">addr</span>, size_t <span class="docEmphasis">length</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Both return 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mlock()</span> system call locks all of the pages of the calling process’s virtual address range starting at <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> and continuing for <span class="docEmphasis">length</span> bytes. Unlike the corresponding argument passed to several other memory-related system calls, <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> does not need to be page-aligned: the kernel locks pages starting at the next page boundary below <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span>. However, SUSv3 optionally allows an implementation to require that <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> be a multiple of the system page size, and portable applications should ensure that this is so when calling <span class="docEmphasis">mlock()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">munlock()</span>.</p><p class="docText">Because locking is done in units of whole pages, the end of the locked region is the next page boundary greater than <span class="docEmphasis">length</span> plus <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span>. For example, on a system where the page size is 4096 bytes, the call <span class="docEmphasis">mlock(2000, 4000)</span> will lock bytes 0 through to 8191.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">We can find out how much memory a process currently has locked by inspecting the <tt>VmLck</tt> entry of the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/status</tt> file.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">After a successful <span class="docEmphasis">mlock()</span> call, all of the pages in the specified range are guaranteed to be locked and resident in physical memory. The <span class="docEmphasis">mlock()</span> system call fails if there is insufficient physical memory to lock all of the requested pages or if the request violates the <tt>RLIMIT_MEMLOCK</tt> soft resource limit.</p><p class="docText">We show an example of the use of <span class="docEmphasis">mlock()</span> in Example 50-2.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">munlock()</span> system call performs the converse of <span class="docEmphasis">mlock()</span>, removing a memory lock previously established by the calling process. The <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">length</span> arguments are interpreted in the same way as for <span class="docEmphasis">munlock()</span>.
 Unlocking a set of pages doesn’t guarantee that they cease to be 
memory-resident: pages are removed from RAM only in response to memory 
demands by other processes.</p><p class="docText">Aside from the explicit use of <span class="docEmphasis">munlock()</span>, memory locks are automatically removed in the following circumstances:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">on process termination;</p></li><li><p class="docList">if the locked pages are unmapped via <span class="docEmphasis">munmap()</span>; or</p></li><li><p class="docList">if the locked pages are overlaid using the <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> <tt>MAP_FIXED</tt> flag.</p></li></ul><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EFVDM">50.2.1.3. Details of the semantics of memory locking</h5><p class="docText">In the following paragraphs, we note some details of the semantics of memory locks.</p><p class="docText">Memory locks are not inherited by a child created via <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, and are not preserved across an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>.</p><p class="docText">Where multiple processes share a set of pages (e.g., a <tt>MAP_SHARED</tt> mapping), these pages remain locked in memory as long as at least one of the processes holds a memory lock on the pages.</p><p class="docText">Memory locks don’t nest for a single process. If a process repeatedly calls <span class="docEmphasis">mlock()</span> on a certain virtual address range, only one lock is established, and this lock will be removed by a single call to <span class="docEmphasis">munlock()</span>. On the other hand, if we use <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span>
 to map the same set of pages (i.e., the same file) at several different
 locations within a single process, and then lock each of these 
mappings, the pages remain locked in RAM until all of the mappings have 
been unlocked.</p><p class="docText">The fact
 that memory locks are performed in units of pages and can’t be nested 
means that it isn’t logically correct to independently apply <span class="docEmphasis">mlock()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">munlock()</span>
 calls to different data structures on the same virtual page. For 
example, suppose we have two data structures within the same virtual 
memory page pointed to by pointers <span class="docEmphasis">p1</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">p2</span>, and we make the following calls:</p><pre>mlock(*p1, len1);
mlock(*p2, len2);               /* Actually has no effect */
munlock(*p1, len1);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">All of the above calls will 
succeed, but at the end of this sequence, the entire page is unlocked; 
that is, the data structure pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">p2</span> is not locked into memory.</p><p class="docText">Note that the semantics of the <span class="docEmphasis">shmctl()</span> <tt>SHM_LOCK</tt> operation (Section 48.7) differ from those of <span class="docEmphasis">mlock()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">mlockall()</span>, as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">After a <tt>SHM_LOCK</tt> operation, pages are locked into memory only as they are faulted in by subsequent references. By contrast, <span class="docEmphasis">mlock()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">mlockall()</span> fault all of the locked pages into memory before the call returns.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>SHM_LOCK</tt> operation sets a property of the shared memory segment, rather than the process. (For this reason, the value in the <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/status VmLck</tt> field doesn’t include the size of any attached System V shared memory segments that have been locked using <tt>SHM_LOCK</tt>.)
 This means that, once faulted into memory, the pages remain resident 
even if all processes detach the shared memory segment. By contrast, a 
region locked into memory using <span class="docEmphasis">mlock()</span> (or <span class="docEmphasis">mlockall()</span>) remains locked only as long as at least one process holds a lock on the region.</p></li></ul><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EBYDM">50.2.1.4. Locking and unlocking all of a process’s memory</h5><p class="docText">A process can use <span class="docEmphasis">mlockall()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">munlockall()</span> to lock and unlock all of its memory.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/mman.h&gt;

int <b>mlockall</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>);
int <b>munlockall</b>(void);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Both return 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mlockall()</span>
 system call locks all of the currently mapped pages in a process’s 
virtual address space, all of the pages mapped in the future, or both, 
according to the <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> bit mask, which is specified by ORing together one or both of the following constants:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MCL_CURRENT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Lock
 all pages that are currently mapped into the calling process’s virtual 
address space. This includes all pages currently allocated for the 
program text, data segments, memory mappings, and the stack. After a 
successful call specifying the <tt>MCL_CURRENT</tt>
 flag, all of the pages of the calling process are guaranteed to be 
memory-resident. This flag doesn’t affect pages that are subsequently 
allocated in the process’s virtual address space; for this, we must use <tt>MCL_FUTURE</tt>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MCL_FUTURE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Lock
 all pages subsequently mapped into the calling process’s virtual 
address space. Such pages may, for example, be part of a shared memory 
region mapped via <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">shmat()</span>, or part of the upwardly growing heap or downwardly growing stack. As a consequence of specifying the <tt>MCL_FUTURE</tt> flag, a later memory allocation operation (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">sbrk()</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">malloc()</span>) may fail, or stack growth may yield a <tt>SIGSEGV</tt> signal, if the system runs out of RAM to allocate to the process or the <tt>RLIMIT_MEMLOCK</tt> soft resource limit is encountered.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">The same rules regarding the constraints, lifetime, and inheritance of memory locks created with <span class="docEmphasis">mlock()</span> also apply for memory locks created via <span class="docEmphasis">mlockall()</span>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">munlockall()</span> system call unlocks all of the pages of the calling process and undoes the effect of any previous <span class="docEmphasis">mlockall(MCL_FUTURE)</span> call. As with <span class="docEmphasis">munlock()</span>, unlocked pages are not guaranteed to be removed from RAM by this call.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Before Linux 2.6.9, privilege (<tt>CAP_IPC_LOCK</tt>) was required to call <span class="docEmphasis">munlockall()</span> (inconsistently, privilege was not required for <span class="docEmphasis">munlock()</span>). Since Linux 2.6.9, privilege is no longer required.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
