<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>50.4. Advising Future Memory Usage Patterns: madvise()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">50.4. Advising Future Memory Usage Patterns: <span class="docEmphasis">madvise()</span></h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">madvise()</span>
 system call is used is to improve the performance of an application by 
informing the kernel about the calling process’s likely usage of the 
pages in the range starting at <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> and continuing for <span class="docEmphasis">length</span>
 bytes. The kernel may use this information to improve the efficiency of
 I/O performed on the file mapping that underlies the pages. (See Section 49.4 for a discussion of file mappings.) On Linux, <span class="docEmphasis">madvise()</span> has been available since kernel 2.4.</p><pre>#define _BSD_SOURCE
#include &lt;sys/mman.h&gt;

int <b>madvise</b>(void *<span class="docEmphasis">addr</span>, size_t <span class="docEmphasis">length</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">advice</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The value specified in <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> must be page-aligned, and <span class="docEmphasis">length</span> is effectively rounded up to the next multiple of the system page size. The <span class="docEmphasis">advice</span> argument is one of the following:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MADV_NORMAL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This
 is the default behavior. Pages are transferred in clusters (a small 
multiple of the system page size). This results in some read-ahead and 
read-behind.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MADV_RANDOM</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Pages
 in this region will be accessed randomly, so read-ahead will yield no 
benefit. Thus, the kernel should fetch the minimum amount of data on 
each read.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MADV_SEQUENTIAL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Pages
 in this range will be accessed once, sequentially. Thus, the kernel can
 aggressively read ahead, and pages can be quickly freed after they have
 been accessed.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MADV_WILLNEED</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Read pages in this region ahead, in preparation for future access. The <tt>MADV_WILLNEED</tt> operation has an effect similar to the Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">readahead()</span> system call and the <span class="docEmphasis">posix_fadvise()</span> <tt>POSIX_FADV_WILLNEED</tt> operation.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MADV_DONTNEED</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The
 calling process no longer requires the pages in this region to be 
memory-resident. The precise effect of this flag varies across UNIX 
implementations. We first note the behavior on Linux. For a <tt>MAP_PRIVATE</tt>
 region, the mapped pages are explicitly discarded, which means that 
modifications to the pages are lost. The virtual memory address range 
remains accessible, but the next access of each page will result in a 
page fault reinitializing the page, either with the contents of the file
 from which it is mapped or with zeros in the case of an anonymous 
mapping. This can be used as a means of explicitly reinitializing the 
contents of a <tt>MAP_PRIVATE</tt> region. For a <tt>MAP_SHARED</tt> region, the kernel <span class="docEmphasis">may</span>
 discard modified pages in some circumstances, depending on the 
architecture (this behavior doesn’t occur on x86). Some other UNIX 
implementations also behave in the same way as Linux. However, on some 
UNIX implementations, <tt>MADV_DONTNEED</tt> 
simply informs the kernel that the specified pages can be swapped out if
 necessary. Portable applications should not rely on the Linux’s 
destructive semantics for <tt>MADV_DONTNEED</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Linux 2.6.16 added three new nonstandard <span class="docEmphasis">advice</span> values: <tt>MADV_DONTFORK</tt>, <tt>MADV_DOFORK</tt>, and <tt>MADV_REMOVE</tt>. Linux 2.6.32 and 2.6.33 added another four nonstandard <span class="docEmphasis">advice</span> values: <tt>MADV_HWPOISON</tt>, <tt>MADV_SOFT_OFFLINE</tt>, <tt>MADV_MERGEABLE</tt>, and <tt>MADV_UNMERGEABLE</tt>. These values are used in special circumstances and are described in the <span class="docEmphasis">madvise(2)</span> manual page.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></dd></dl><p class="docText">Most UNIX implementations provide a version of <span class="docEmphasis">madvise()</span>, typically allowing at least the <span class="docEmphasis">advice</span> constants described above. However, SUSv3 standardizes this API under a different name, <span class="docEmphasis">posix_madvise()</span>, and prefixes the corresponding <span class="docEmphasis">advice</span> constants with the string <tt>POSIX_</tt>. Thus, the constants are <tt>POSIX_MADV_NORMAL</tt>, <tt>POSIX_MADV_RANDOM</tt>, <tt>POSIX_MADV_SEQUENTIAL</tt>, <tt>POSIX_MADV_WILLNEED</tt>, and <tt>POSIX_MADV_DONTNEED</tt>. This alternative interface is implemented in <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> (version 2.2 and later) by calls to <span class="docEmphasis">madvise()</span>, but it is not available on all UNIX implementations.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">SUSv3 says that <span class="docEmphasis">posix_madvise()</span> should not affect the semantics of a program. However, in <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> versions before 2.7, the <tt>POSIX_MADV_DONTNEED</tt> operation is implemented using <span class="docEmphasis">madvise()</span> <tt>MADV_DONTNEED</tt>, which does affect the semantics of a program, as described earlier. Since <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> 2.7, the <span class="docEmphasis">posix_madvise()</span> wrapper implements <tt>POSIX_MADV_DONTNEED</tt> to do nothing, so that it does not affect the semantics of a program.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
