<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 51. Introduction to POSIX IPC</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0EEPDM">Chapter 51. Introduction to POSIX IPC</h2><p class="docText">The POSIX.1b realtime extensions defined a set of IPC mechanisms that are analogous to the System V IPC mechanisms described in Chapter 45 to Chapter 48.
 (One of the POSIX.1b developers’ aims was to devise a set of IPC 
mechanisms that did not suffer the deficiencies of the System V IPC 
facilities.) These IPC mechanisms are collectively referred to as POSIX 
IPC. The three POSIX IPC mechanisms are the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Message queues</span>
 can be used to pass messages between processes. As with System V 
message queues, message boundaries are preserved, so that readers and 
writers communicate in units of messages (as opposed to the undelimited 
byte stream provided by a pipe). POSIX message queues permit each 
message to be assigned a priority, which allows high-priority messages 
to be queued ahead of low-priority messages. This provides some of the 
same functionality that is available via the type field of System V 
messages.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Semaphores</span>
 permit multiple processes to synchronize their actions. As with System V
 semaphores, a POSIX semaphore is a kernel-maintained integer whose 
value is never permitted to go below 0. POSIX semaphores are simpler to 
use than System V semaphores: they are allocated individually (as 
opposed to System V semaphore <span class="docEmphasis">sets</span>),
 and they are operated on individually using two operations that 
increase and decrease a semaphore’s value by one (as opposed to the 
ability of the <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> system call to atomically add or subtract arbitrary values from multiple semaphores in a System V semaphore set).</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Shared memory</span>
 enables multiple processes to share the same region of memory. As with 
System V shared memory, POSIX shared memory provides fast IPC. Once one 
process has updated the shared memory, the change is immediately visible
 to other processes sharing the same region.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">This chapter provides an overview of the POSIX IPC facilities, focusing on their common features.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
