<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>51.1. API Overview</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">51.1. API Overview</h3><p class="docText">The three POSIX IPC mechanisms have a number of common features. Table 51-1 summarizes their APIs, and we go into the details of their common features in the next few pages.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Except for a mention in Table 51-1,
 in the remainder of this chapter, we’ll overlook the fact that POSIX 
semaphores come in two flavors: named semaphores and unnamed semaphores.
 Named semaphores are like the other POSIX IPC mechanisms that we 
describe in this chapter: they are identified by a name, and are 
accessible by any process that has suitable permissions on the object. 
An unnamed semaphore doesn’t have an associated identifier; instead, it 
is placed in an area of memory that is shared by a group of processes or
 by the threads of a single process. We go into the details of both 
types of semaphores in Chapter 53.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 51-1. Summary of programming interfaces for POSIX IPC objects</h5></caption><colgroup span="4"><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Interface</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Message queues</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Semaphores</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Shared memory</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Header file</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>&lt;mqueue.h&gt;</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>&lt;semaphore.h&gt;</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>&lt;sys/mman.h&gt;</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Object handle</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">mqd_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">sem_t *</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">int</span> (file descriptor)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Create/open</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">mq_open()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">sem_open()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">shm_open()</span> + <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Close</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">mq_close()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">sem_close()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">munmap()</span></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Unlink</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">mq_unlink()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">sem_unlink()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">shm_unlink()</span></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Perform IPC</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">mq_send()</span>,
<span class="docEmphasis">mq_receive()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">sem_post(), sem_wait()</span>,
<span class="docEmphasis">sem_getvalue()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">operate on locations in shared region</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Miscellaneous operations</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">mq_setattr()</span>—set attributes
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">mq_getattr()</span>—get attributes</p>
<span class="docEmphasis">mq_notify()</span>—request notification</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">sem_init()</span>—initialize
<p class="docText">unnamed semaphore</p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">sem_destroy()</span>—destroy</p>
unnamed semaphore</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">(none)</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EZ1DM">51.1.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E41DM">51.1.1.1. IPC object names</h5><p class="docText">To
 access a POSIX IPC object, we must have some means of identifying it. 
The only portable means that SUSv3 specifies to identify a POSIX IPC 
object is via a name consisting of an initial slash, followed by one of 
more nonslash characters; for example, <tt>/myobject</tt>. Linux and some other implementations (e.g., Solaris) permit this type of portable naming for IPC objects.</p><p class="docText">On Linux, names for POSIX shared memory and message queue objects are limited to <tt>NAME_MAX</tt> (255) characters. For semaphores, the limit is 4 characters less, since the implementation prepends the string <span class="docEmphasis">sem</span>. to the semaphore name.</p><p class="docText">SUSv3 doesn’t prohibit names of a form other than <tt>/myobject</tt>,
 but says that the semantics of such names are implementation-defined. 
The rules for creating IPC object names on some systems are different. 
For example, on Tru64 5.1, IPC object names are created as names within 
the standard file system, and the name is interpreted as an absolute or 
relative pathname. If the caller doesn’t have permission to create a 
file in that directory, then the IPC <span class="docEmphasis">open</span> call fails. This means that unprivileged programs can’t create names of the form <tt>/myobject</tt> on Tru64, since unprivileged users normally can’t create files in the root directory (<tt>/</tt>). Some other implementations have similar implementation-specific rules for the construction of the names given to IPC <span class="docEmphasis">open</span>
 calls. Therefore, in portable applications, we should isolate the 
generation of IPC object names into a separate function or header file 
that can be tailored to the target implementation.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EC3DM">51.1.1.2. Creating or opening an IPC object</h5><p class="docText">Each IPC mechanism has an associated <span class="docEmphasis">open</span> call (<span class="docEmphasis">mq_open(), sem_open()</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">shm_open()</span>), which is analogous to the traditional UNIX <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> system call used for files. Given an IPC object name, the IPC <span class="docEmphasis">open</span> call either:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">creates a new object with the given name, opens that object, and returns a handle for it; or</p></li><li><p class="docList">opens an existing object and returns a handle for that object.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The handle returned by the IPC <span class="docEmphasis">open</span> call is analogous to the file descriptor returned by the traditional <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> system call—it is used in subsequent calls to refer to the object.</p><p class="docText">The type of handle returned by the IPC <span class="docEmphasis">open</span> call depends on the type of object. For message queues, it is a message queue descriptor, a value of type <span class="docEmphasis">mqd_t</span>. For semaphores, it is a pointer of type <span class="docEmphasis">sem_t *</span>. For shared memory, it is a file descriptor.</p><p class="docText">All of the IPC <span class="docEmphasis">open</span> calls permit at least three arguments—<span class="docEmphasis">name</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">oflag</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span>—as exemplified by the following <span class="docEmphasis">shm_open()</span> call:</p><pre>fd = shm_open("/mymem", O_CREAT | O_RDWR, S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">These arguments are analogous to the arguments of the traditional UNIX <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> system call. The <span class="docEmphasis">name</span> argument identifies the object to be created or opened. The <span class="docEmphasis">oflag</span> argument is a bit mask that can include at least the following flags:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">O_CREAT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Create the object if it doesn’t already exist. If this flag is not specified and the object doesn’t exist, an error results (<tt>ENOENT</tt>).</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">O_EXCL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">If <tt>O_CREAT</tt> is also specified and the object already exists, an error results (<tt>EEXIST</tt>). The two steps—check for existence and creation—are performed atomically (Section 5.1). This flag has no effect if <tt>O_CREAT</tt> is not specified.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">Depending on the type of object, <span class="docEmphasis">oflag</span> may also include one of the values <tt>O_RDONLY</tt>, <tt>O_WRONLY</tt>, or <tt>O_RDWR</tt>, with meanings similar to <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>. Additional flags are allowed for some IPC mechanisms.</p><p class="docText">The remaining argument, <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span>, is a bit mask specifying the permissions to be placed on a new object, if one is created by the call (i.e., <tt>O_CREAT</tt> was specified and the object did not already exist). The values that may be specified for <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> are the same as for files (Table 15-4, in Section 15.4.1). As with the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> system call, the permissions mask in <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> is masked against the process umask (Section 15.4.6).
 The ownership and group ownership of a new IPC object are taken from 
the effective user and group IDs of the process making the IPC <span class="docEmphasis">open</span>
 call. (To be strictly accurate, on Linux, the ownership of a new POSIX 
IPC object is determined by the process’s file-system IDs, which 
normally have the same value as the corresponding effective IDs. Refer 
to Section 9.5.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On
 systems where IPC objects appear in the standard file system, SUSv3 
permits an implementation to set the group ID of a new IPC object to the
 group ID of the parent directory.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EACEM">51.1.1.3. Closing an IPC object</h5><p class="docText">For POSIX message queues and semaphores, there is an IPC <span class="docEmphasis">close</span>
 call that indicates that the calling process has finished using the 
object and the system may deallocate any resources that were associated 
with the object for this process. A POSIX shared memory object is closed
 by unmapping it with <span class="docEmphasis">munmap()</span>.</p><p class="docText">IPC objects are automatically closed if the process terminates or performs an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ENDEM">51.1.1.4. IPC object permissions</h5><p class="docText">IPC
 objects have a permissions mask that is the same as for files. 
Permissions for accessing an IPC object are similar to those for 
accessing files (Section 15.4.3), except that execute permission has no meaning for POSIX IPC objects.</p><p class="docText">Since
 kernel 2.6.19, Linux supports the use of access control lists (ACLs) 
for setting the permissions on POSIX shared memory objects and named 
semaphores. Currently, ACLs are not supported for POSIX message queues.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EZDEM">51.1.1.5. IPC object deletion and object persistence</h5><p class="docText">As with open files, POSIX IPC objects are <span class="docEmphasis">reference counted</span>—the
 kernel maintains a count of the number of open references to the 
object. By comparison with System V IPC objects, this makes it easier 
for applications to determine when the object can be safely deleted.</p><p class="docText">Each IPC object has a corresponding <span class="docEmphasis">unlink</span> call whose operation is analogous to the traditional <span class="docEmphasis">unlink()</span> system call for files. The <span class="docEmphasis">unlink</span>
 call immediately removes the object’s name, and then destroys the 
object once all processes cease using it (i.e., when the reference count
 falls to zero). For message queues and semaphores, this means that the 
object is destroyed after all processes have closed the object; for 
shared memory, destruction occurs after all processes have unmapped the 
object using <span class="docEmphasis">munmap()</span>.</p><p class="docText">After an object is unlinked, IPC <span class="docEmphasis">open</span> calls specifying the same object name will refer to a new object (or fail, if <tt>O_CREAT</tt> was not specified).</p><p class="docText">As
 with System V IPC, POSIX IPC objects have kernel persistence. Once 
created, an object continues to exist until it is unlinked or the system
 is shut down. This allows a process to create an object, modify its 
state, and then exit, leaving the object to be accessed by some process 
that is started at a later time.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EZEEM">51.1.1.6. Listing and removing POSIX IPC objects via the command line</h5><p class="docText">System V IPC provides two commands, <span class="docEmphasis">ipcs</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ipcrm</span>,
 for listing and deleting IPC objects. No standard commands are provided
 to perform the analogous tasks for POSIX IPC objects. However, on many 
systems, including Linux, IPC objects are implemented within a real or 
virtual file system, mounted somewhere under the root directory (<tt>/</tt>), and the standard <span class="docEmphasis">ls</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">rm</span> commands can be used to list and remove IPC objects. (SUSv3 doesn’t specify the use of <span class="docEmphasis">ls</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">rm</span>
 for these tasks.) The main problem with using these commands is the 
nonstandard nature of POSIX IPC object names and their location in the 
file system.</p><p class="docText">On
 Linux, POSIX IPC objects are contained in virtual file systems mounted 
under directories that have the sticky bit set. This bit is the 
restricted deletion flag (Section 15.4.5); setting it means that an unprivileged process can unlink only the POSIX IPC objects that it owns.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EFGEM">51.1.1.7. Compiling programs that use POSIX IPC on Linux</h5><p class="docText">On Linux, programs employing the POSIX IPC mechanisms must be linked with the <span class="docEmphasis">realtime</span> library, <span class="docEmphasis">librt</span>, by specifying the <span class="docEmphasis">-lrt</span> option to the <span class="docEmphasis">cc</span> command.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
