<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>51.2. Comparison of System V IPC and POSIX IPC</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">51.2. Comparison of System V IPC and POSIX IPC</h3><p class="docText">As
 we look at the POSIX IPC mechanisms in the following chapters, we’ll 
compare each mechanism against its System V counterpart. Here, we 
consider a few general comparisons for these two types of IPC.</p><p class="docText">POSIX IPC has the following general advantages when compared to System V IPC:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The POSIX IPC interface is simpler than the System V IPC interface.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The POSIX IPC model—the use of names instead of keys, and the <span class="docEmphasis">open</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">close</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">unlink</span> functions—is more consistent with the traditional UNIX file model.</p></li><li><p class="docList">POSIX
 IPC objects are reference counted. This simplifies object deletion, 
because we can unlink a POSIX IPC object, knowing that it will be 
destroyed only when all processes have closed it.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">However,
 there is one notable advantage in favor of System V IPC: portability. 
POSIX IPC is less portable than System V IPC in the following respects:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">System
 V IPC is specified in SUSv3 and supported on nearly every UNIX 
implementation. By contrast, each of the POSIX IPC mechanisms is an 
optional component in SUSv3. Some UNIX implementations don’t support 
(all of) the POSIX IPC mechanisms. This situation is reflected in 
microcosm on Linux: POSIX shared memory is supported only since kernel 
2.4; a full implementation of POSIX semaphores is available only since 
kernel 2.6; and POSIX message queues are supported only since kernel 
2.6.6.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Despite
 the SUSv3 specification for POSIX IPC object names, the various 
implementations follow different conventions for naming IPC objects. 
These differences require us to do (a little) extra work to write 
portable applications.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Various
 details of POSIX IPC are not specified in SUSv3. In particular, no 
commands are specified for displaying and deleting the IPC objects that 
exist on a system. (In many implementations, standard file-system 
commands are used, but the details of the pathnames used to identify IPC
 objects vary.)</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
