<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 52. POSIX Message Queues</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0E3SDM">Chapter 52. POSIX Message Queues</h2><p class="docText">This
 chapter describes POSIX message queues, which allow processes to 
exchange data in the form of messages. POSIX message queues are similar 
to their System V counterparts, in that data is exchanged in units of 
whole messages. However, there are also some notable differences:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">POSIX
 message queues are reference counted. A queue that is marked for 
deletion is removed only after it is closed by all processes that are 
currently using it.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Each System V message has an integer type, and messages can be selected in a variety of ways using <span class="docEmphasis">msgrcv()</span>.
 By contrast, POSIX messages have an associated priority, and messages 
are always strictly queued (and thus received) in priority order.</p></li><li><p class="docList">POSIX
 message queues provide a feature that allows a process to be 
asynchronously notified when a message is available on a queue.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">POSIX
 message queues are a relatively recent addition to Linux. The required 
implementation support was added in kernel 2.6.6 (in addition, <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> 2.3.4 or later is required).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">POSIX message queue support is an optional kernel component that is configured via the <tt>CONFIG_POSIX_MQUEUE</tt> option.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
