<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>52.1. Overview</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">52.1. Overview</h3><p class="docText">The main functions in the POSIX message queue API are the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">mq_open()</span> function creates a new message queue or opens an existing queue, returning a message queue descriptor for use in later calls.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">mq_send()</span> function writes a message to a queue.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">mq_receive()</span> function reads a message from a queue.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">mq_close()</span> function closes a message queue that the process previously opened.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">mq_unlink()</span> function removes a message queue name and marks the queue for deletion when all processes have closed it.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The
 above functions all serve fairly obvious purposes. In addition, a 
couple of features are peculiar to the POSIX message queue API:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Each
 message queue has an associated set of attributes. Some of these 
attributes can be set when the queue is created or opened using <span class="docEmphasis">mq_open()</span>. Two functions are provided to retrieve and change queue attributes: <span class="docEmphasis">mq_getattr()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">mq_setattr()</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">mq_notify()</span>
 function allows a process to register for message notification from a 
queue. After registering, the process is notified of the availability of
 a message by delivery of a signal or by the invocation of a function in
 a separate thread.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
