<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>52.2. Opening, Closing, and Unlinking a Message Queue</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">52.2. Opening, Closing, and Unlinking a Message Queue</h3><p class="docText">In this section, we look at the functions used to open, close, and remove message queues.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EIVDM">52.2.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EMVDM">52.2.1.1. Opening a message queue</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mq_open()</span> function creates a new message queue or opens an existing queue.</p><pre>#include &lt;fcntl.h&gt;            /* Defines O_* constants */
#include &lt;sys/stat.h&gt;         /* Defines mode constants */
#include &lt;mqueue.h&gt;

mqd_t <b>mq_open</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">name</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">oflag</span>, ...
              /* mode_t <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span>, struct mq_attr *<span class="docEmphasis">attr</span> */);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns a message queue descriptor on success, or <span class="docEmphasis">(mqd_t)</span> -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">name</span> argument identifies the message queue, and is specified according to the rules given in Section 51.1.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">oflag</span> argument is a bit mask that controls various aspects of the operation of <span class="docEmphasis">mq_open()</span>. The values that can be included in this mask are summarized in Table 52-1.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 52-1. Bit values for the <span class="docEmphasis">mq_open() oflag</span> argument</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Flag</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_CREAT</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Create queue if it doesn’t already exist</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_EXCL</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">With <tt>O_CREAT</tt>, create queue exclusively</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_RDONLY</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Open for reading only</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_WRONLY</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Open for writing only</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_RDWR</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Open for reading and writing</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Open in nonblocking mode</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">One of the purposes of the <span class="docEmphasis">oflag</span> argument is to determine whether we are opening an existing queue or creating and opening a new queue. If <span class="docEmphasis">oflag</span> doesn’t include <tt>O_CREAT</tt>, we are opening an existing queue. If <span class="docEmphasis">oflag</span> includes <tt>O_CREAT</tt>, a new, empty queue is created if one with the given <span class="docEmphasis">name</span> doesn’t already exist. If <span class="docEmphasis">oflag</span> specifies both <tt>O_CREAT</tt> and <tt>O_EXCL</tt>, and a queue with the given <span class="docEmphasis">name</span> already exists, then <span class="docEmphasis">mq_open()</span> fails.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">oflag</span>
 argument also indicates the kind of access that the calling process 
will make to the message queue, by specifying exactly one of the values <tt>O_RDONLY</tt>, <tt>O_WRONLY</tt>, or <tt>O_RDWR</tt>.</p><p class="docText">The remaining flag value, <tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt>, causes the queue to be opened in nonblocking mode. If a subsequent call to <span class="docEmphasis">mq_receive()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">mq_send()</span> can’t be performed without blocking, the call will fail immediately with the error <tt>EAGAIN</tt>.</p><p class="docText">If <span class="docEmphasis">mq_open()</span> is being used to open an existing message queue, the call requires only two arguments. However, if <tt>O_CREAT</tt> is specified in <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>, two further arguments are required: <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">attr</span>. (If the queue specified by <span class="docEmphasis">name</span> already exists, these two arguments are ignored.) These arguments are used as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span>
 argument is a bit mask that specifies the permissions to be placed on 
the new message queue. The bit values that may be specified are the same
 as for files (Table 15-4, in Section 15.4.1), and, as with <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>, the value in <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> is masked against the process umask (Section 15.4.6). To read from a queue (<span class="docEmphasis">mq_receive()</span>), read permission must be granted to the corresponding class of user; to write to a queue (<span class="docEmphasis">mq_send()</span>), write permission is required.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">attr</span> argument is an <span class="docEmphasis">mq_attr</span> structure that specifies attributes for the new message queue. If <span class="docEmphasis">attr</span> is <tt>NULL</tt>, the queue is created with implementation-defined default attributes. We describe the <span class="docEmphasis">mq_attr</span> structure in Section 52.4.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Upon successful completion, <span class="docEmphasis">mq_open()</span> returns a <span class="docEmphasis">message queue descriptor</span>, a value of type <span class="docEmphasis">mqd_t</span>,
 which is used in subsequent calls to refer to this open message queue. 
The only stipulation that SUSv3 makes about this data type is that it 
may not be an array; that is, it is guaranteed to be a type that can be 
used in an assignment statement or passed by value as a function 
argument. (On Linux, <span class="docEmphasis">mqd_t</span> is an <span class="docEmphasis">int</span>, but, for example, on Solaris it is defined as <span class="docEmphasis">void *</span>.)</p><p class="docText">An example of the use of <span class="docEmphasis">mq_open()</span> is provided in Example 52-2.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EI5DM">52.2.1.2. Effect of <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, and process termination on message queue descriptors</h5><p class="docText">During a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>,
 the child process receives copies of its parent’s message queue 
descriptors, and these descriptors refer to the same open message queue 
descriptions. (We explain message queue descriptions in Section 52.3.) 
The child doesn’t inherit any of its parent’s message notification 
registrations.</p><p class="docText">When a process performs an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>
 or terminates, all of its open message queue descriptors are closed. As
 a consequence of closing its message queue descriptors, all of the 
process’s message notification registrations on the corresponding queues
 are deregistered.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EZAEM">52.2.1.3. Closing a message queue</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mq_close()</span> function closes the message queue descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">mqdes</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;mqueue.h&gt;

int <b>mq_close</b>(mqd_t <span class="docEmphasis">mqdes</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If the calling process has registered via <span class="docEmphasis">mqdes</span> for message notification from the queue (Section 52.6),
 then the notification registration is automatically removed, and 
another process can subsequently register for message notification from 
the queue.</p><p class="docText">A message queue descriptor is automatically closed when a process terminates or calls <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>.
 As with file descriptors, we should explicitly close message queue 
descriptors that are no longer required, in order to prevent the process
 from running out of message queue descriptors.</p><p class="docText">As <span class="docEmphasis">close()</span> for files, closing a message queue doesn’t delete it. For that purpose, we need <span class="docEmphasis">mq_unlink()</span>, which is the message queue analog of <span class="docEmphasis">unlink()</span>.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EODEM">52.2.1.4. Removing a message queue</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mq_unlink()</span> function removes the message queue identified by <span class="docEmphasis">name</span>,
 and marks the queue to be destroyed once all processes cease using it 
(this may mean immediately, if all processes that had the queue open 
have already closed it).</p><pre>#include &lt;mqueue.h&gt;

int <b>mq_unlink</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">name</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Example 52-1 demonstrates the use of <span class="docEmphasis">mq_unlink()</span>.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EMEEM">Example 52-1. Using <span class="docEmphasis">mq_unlink()</span> to unlink a POSIX message queue</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre><b>pmsg/pmsg_unlink.c</b>
#include &lt;mqueue.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    if (argc != 2 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s mq-name\n", argv[0]);

    if (mq_unlink(argv[1]) == -1)
        errExit("mq_unlink");
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
    <b>pmsg/pmsg_unlink.c</b></pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
