<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>52.8. Message Queue Limits</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">52.8. Message Queue Limits</h3><p class="docText">SUSv3 defines two limits for POSIX message queues:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MQ_PRIO_MAX</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">We described this limit, which defines the maximum priority for a message, in Section 52.5.1.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MQ_OPEN_MAX</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">An
 implementation can define this limit to indicate the maximum number of 
message queues that a process can hold open. SUSv3 requires this limit 
to be at least <tt>_POSIX_MQ_OPEN_MAX</tt> (8). Linux doesn’t define this limit. Instead, because Linux implements message queue descriptors as file descriptors (Section 52.7),
 the applicable limits are those that apply to file descriptors. (In 
other words, on Linux, the per-process and system-wide limits on the 
number of file descriptors actually apply to the sum of file descriptors
 and message queue descriptors.) For further details on the applicable 
limits, see the discussion of the <tt>RLIMIT_NOFILE</tt> resource limit in Section 36.3.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">As well as the above SUSv3-specified limits, Linux provides a number of <tt>/proc</tt>
 files for viewing and (with privilege) changing limits that control the
 use of POSIX message queues. The following three files reside in the 
directory <tt>/proc/sys/fs/mqueue</tt>:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">msg_max</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This limit specifies a ceiling for the <span class="docEmphasis">mq_maxmsg</span> attribute of new message queues (i.e., a ceiling for <span class="docEmphasis">attr.mq_maxmsg</span> when creating a queue with <span class="docEmphasis">mq_open()</span>).
 The default value for this limit is 10. The minimum value is 1 (10 in 
kernels before Linux 2.6.28). The maximum value is defined by the kernel
 constant <tt>HARD_MSGMAX</tt>. The value for this constant is calculated as (131,072 / <span class="docEmphasis">sizeof(void *)</span>), which evaluates to 32,768 on Linux/x86-32. When a privileged process (<tt>CAP_SYS_RESOURCE</tt>) calls <span class="docEmphasis">mq_open()</span>, the <tt>msg_max</tt> limit is ignored, but <tt>HARD_MSGMAX</tt> still acts as a ceiling for <span class="docEmphasis">attr.mq_maxmsg</span>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">msgsize_max</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This limit specifies a ceiling for the <span class="docEmphasis">mq_msgsize</span> attribute of new message queues created by unprivileged processes (i.e., a ceiling for <span class="docEmphasis">attr.mq_msgsize</span> when creating a queue with <span class="docEmphasis">mq_open()</span>).
 The default value for this limit is 8192. The minimum value is 128 
(8192 in kernels before Linux 2.6.28). The maximum value is 1,048,576 (<tt>INT_MAX</tt> in kernels before 2.6.28). This limit is ignored when a privileged process (<tt>CAP_SYS_RESOURCE</tt>) calls <span class="docEmphasis">mq_open()</span>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">queues_max</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This
 is a system-wide limit on the number of message queues that may be 
created. Once this limit is reached, only a privileged process (<tt>CAP_SYS_RESOURCE</tt>) can create new queues. The default value for this limit is 256. It can be changed to any value in the range 0 to <tt>INT_MAX</tt>.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">Linux also provides the <tt>RLIMIT_MSGQUEUE</tt>
 resource limit, which can be used to place a ceiling on the amount of 
space that can be consumed by all of the message queues belonging to the
 real user ID of the calling process. See Section 36.3 for details.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
