<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>52.9. Comparison of POSIX and System V Message Queues</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">52.9. Comparison of POSIX and System V Message Queues</h3><p class="docText">Section 51.2
 listed various advantages of the POSIX IPC interface over the System V 
IPC interface: the POSIX IPC interface is simpler and more consistent 
with the traditional UNIX file model, and POSIX IPC objects are 
reference counted, which simplifies the task of determining when to 
delete an object. These general advantages also apply to POSIX message 
queues.</p><p class="docText">POSIX message queues also have the following specific advantages over System V message queues:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The
 message notification feature allows a (single) process to be 
asynchronously notified via a signal or the instantiation of a thread 
when a message arrives on a previously empty queue.</p></li><li><p class="docList">On Linux (but not other UNIX implementations), POSIX message queues can be monitored using <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>. System V message queues don’t provide this feature.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">However, POSIX message queues also have some disadvantages compared to System V message queues:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">POSIX
 message queues are less portable. This problem applies even across 
Linux systems, since message queue support is available only since 
kernel 2.6.6.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The
 facility to select System V messages by type provides slightly greater 
flexibility than the strict priority ordering of POSIX messages.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">There
 is a wide variation in the manner in which POSIX message queues are 
implemented on UNIX systems. Some systems provide implementations in 
user space, and on at least one such implementation (Solaris 10), the <span class="docEmphasis">mq_open()</span>
 manual page explicitly notes that the implementation can’t be 
considered secure. On Linux, one of the motives for selecting a kernel 
implementation of message queues was that it was not deemed possible to 
provide a secure user-space implementation.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
