<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>52.11. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">52.11. Exercises</h3><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Modify the program in Example 52-5 (<tt>pmsg_receive.c</tt>) to accept a timeout (a relative number of seconds) on the command line, and use <span class="docEmphasis">mq_timedreceive()</span> instead of <span class="docEmphasis">mq_receive()</span>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Recode the sequence-number client-server application of Section 44.8 to use POSIX message queues.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Rewrite the file-server application of Section 46.8 to use POSIX message queues instead of System V message queues.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write a simple chat program (similar to <span class="docEmphasis">talk(1)</span>, but without the <span class="docEmphasis">curses</span> interface) using POSIX messages queues.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Modify the program in Example 52-6 (<tt>mq_notify_sig.c</tt>) to demonstrate that message notification established by <span class="docEmphasis">mq_notify()</span> occurs just once. This can be done by removing the <span class="docEmphasis">mq_notify()</span> call inside the <tt>for</tt> loop.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Replace the use of a signal handler in Example 52-6 (<tt>mq_notify_sig.c</tt>) with the use of <span class="docEmphasis">sigwaitinfo()</span>. Upon return from <span class="docEmphasis">sigwaitinfo()</span>, display the values in the returned <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span> structure. How could the program obtain the message queue descriptor in the <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span> structure returned by <span class="docEmphasis">sigwaitinfo()</span>?</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">In Example 52-7, could <span class="docEmphasis">buffer</span> be made a global variable and its memory allocated just once (in the main program)? Explain your answer.</p></div></li></ol></div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
