<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>53.1. Overview</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">53.1. Overview</h3><p class="docText">SUSv3 specifies two types of POSIX semaphores:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Named semaphores</span>: This type of semaphore has a name. By calling <span class="docEmphasis">sem_open()</span> with the same name, unrelated processes can access the same semaphore.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Unnamed semaphores</span>:
 This type of semaphore doesn’t have a name; instead, it resides at an 
agreed-upon location in memory. Unnamed semaphores can be shared between
 processes or between a group of threads. When shared between processes,
 the semaphore must reside in a region of (System V, POSIX, or <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span>)
 shared memory. When shared between threads, the semaphore may reside in
 an area of memory shared by the threads (e.g., on the heap or in a 
global variable).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">POSIX
 semaphores operate in a manner similar to System V semaphores; that is,
 a POSIX semaphore is an integer whose value is not permitted to fall 
below 0. If a process attempts to decrease the value of a semaphore 
below 0, then, depending on the function used, the call either blocks or
 fails with an error indicating that the operation was not currently 
possible.</p><p class="docText">Some systems 
don’t provide a full implementation of POSIX semaphores. A typical 
restriction is that only unnamed thread-shared semaphores are supported.
 That was the situation on Linux 2.4; with Linux 2.6 and a <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> that provides NPTL, a full implementation of POSIX semaphores is available.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On Linux 2.6 with NPTL, semaphore operations (increment and decrement) are implemented using the <span class="docEmphasis">futex(2)</span> system call.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
