<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>53.2. Named Semaphores</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">53.2. Named Semaphores</h3><p class="docText">To work with a named semaphore, we employ the following functions:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">sem_open()</span>
 function opens or creates a semaphore, initializes the semaphore if it 
is created by the call, and returns a handle for use in later calls.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">sem_post(sem)</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait(sem)</span> functions respectively increment and decrement a semaphore’s value.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">sem_getvalue()</span> function retrieves a semaphore’s current value.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">sem_close()</span> function removes the calling process’s association with a semaphore that it previously opened.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">sem_unlink()</span> function removes a semaphore name and marks the semaphore for deletion when all processes have closed it.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">SUSv3
 doesn’t specify how named semaphores are to be implemented. Some UNIX 
implementations create them as files in a special location in the 
standard file system. On Linux, they are created as small POSIX shared 
memory objects with names of the form <tt>sem.</tt><span class="docEmphasis">name</span>, in a dedicated <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfs</span> file system (Section 14.10) mounted under the directory <tt>/dev/shm</tt>.
 This file system has kernel persistence--the semaphore objects that it 
contains will persist, even if no process currently has them open, but 
they will be lost if the system is shut down.</p><p class="docText">Named semaphores are supported on Linux since kernel 2.6.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EVFEM">53.2.1. Opening a Named Semaphore</h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sem_open()</span> function creates and opens a new named semaphore or opens an existing semaphore.</p><pre>#include &lt;fcntl.h&gt;            /* Defines O_* constants */
#include &lt;sys/stat.h&gt;         /* Defines mode constants */
#include &lt;semaphore.h&gt;

sem_t *<b>sem_open</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">name</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">oflag</span>, ...
                /* mode_t <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span>, unsigned int <span class="docEmphasis">value</span> */ );</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns pointer to semaphore on success, or <tt>SEM_FAILED</tt> on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">name</span> argument identifies the semaphore. It is specified according to the rules given in Section 51.1.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">oflag</span>
 argument is a bit mask that determines whether we are opening an 
existing semaphore or creating and opening a new semaphore. If <span class="docEmphasis">oflag</span> is 0, we are accessing an existing semaphore. If <tt>O_CREAT</tt> is specified in <span class="docEmphasis">oflag</span>, then a new semaphore is created if one with the given <span class="docEmphasis">name</span> doesn’t already exist. If <span class="docEmphasis">oflag</span> specifies both <tt>O_CREAT</tt> and <tt>O_EXCL</tt>, and a semaphore with the given <span class="docEmphasis">name</span> already exists, then <span class="docEmphasis">sem_open()</span> fails.</p><p class="docText">If <span class="docEmphasis">sem_open()</span> is being used to open an existing semaphore, the call requires only two arguments. However, if <tt>O_CREAT</tt> is specified in <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>, then two further arguments are required: <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">value</span>. (If the semaphore specified by <span class="docEmphasis">name</span> already exists, then these two arguments are ignored.) These arguments are as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span>
 argument is a bit mask that specifies the permissions to be placed on 
the new semaphore. The bit values are the same as for files (Table 15-4, in Section 15.4.1), and, as with <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>, the value in <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> is masked against the process umask (Section 15.4.6). SUSv3 doesn’t specify any access mode flags (<tt>O_RDONLY</tt>, <tt>O_WRONLY</tt>, and <tt>O_RDWR</tt>) for <span class="docEmphasis">oflag</span>. Many implementations, including Linux, assume an access mode of <tt>O_RDWR</tt> when opening a semaphore, since most applications using semaphores must employ both <span class="docEmphasis">sem_post()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait()</span>,
 which involve reading and modifying a semaphore’s value. This means 
that we should ensure that both read and write permissions are granted 
to each category of user—owner, group, and other—that needs to access 
the semaphore.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">value</span>
 argument is an unsigned integer that specifies the initial value to be 
assigned to the new semaphore. The creation and initialization of the 
semaphore are performed atomically. This avoids the complexities 
required for the initialization of System V semaphores (Section 47.5).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Regardless of whether we are creating a new semaphore or opening an existing semaphore, <span class="docEmphasis">sem_open()</span> returns a pointer to a <span class="docEmphasis">sem_t</span> value, and we employ this pointer in subsequent calls to functions that operate on the semaphore. On error, <span class="docEmphasis">sem_open()</span> returns the value <tt>SEM_FAILED</tt>. (On most implementations, <tt>SEM_FAILED</tt> is defined as either <span class="docEmphasis">((sem_t *) 0)</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">((sem_t *) -1)</span>; Linux defines it as the former.)</p><p class="docText">SUSv3 states that the results are undefined if we attempt to perform operations (<span class="docEmphasis">sem_post()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait()</span>, and so on) on a <span class="docEmphasis">copy</span> of the <span class="docEmphasis">sem_t</span> variable pointed to by the return value of <span class="docEmphasis">sem_open()</span>. In other words, the following use of <span class="docEmphasis">sem2</span> is not permissible:</p><pre>sem_t *sp, sem2
sp = sem_open(...);
sem2 = *sp;
sem_wait(&amp;sem2);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">When a child is created via <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, it inherits references to all of the named semaphores that are open in its parent. After the <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, the parent and child can use these semaphores to synchronize their actions.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EDLEM">53.2.1.1. Example program</h5><p class="docText">The program in Example 53-1 provides a simple command-line interface to the <span class="docEmphasis">sem_open()</span> function. The command format for this program is shown in the <span class="docEmphasis">usageError()</span> function.</p><p class="docText">The following shell session log demonstrates the use of this program. We first use the <span class="docEmphasis">umask</span>
 command to deny all permissions to users in the class other. We then 
exclusively create a semaphore and examine the contents of the 
Linux-specific virtual directory that contains named semaphores.</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>umask 007 </b>
$ <b>./psem_create -cx /demo 666 </b>             <i> 666 means read+write for all users</i>
$ <b>ls -l /dev/shm/sem.* </b>
-rw-rw----  1 mtk users 16 Jul  6 12:09 /dev/shm/sem.demo

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The output of the <span class="docEmphasis">ls</span> command shows that the process umask overrode the specified permissions of read plus write for the user class other.</p><p class="docText">If we try once more to exclusively create a semaphore with the same name, the operation fails, because the name already exists.</p><pre>$ <b>./psem_create -cx /demo 666 </b>
ERROR [EEXIST File exists] sem_open       <i> Failed because of</i> O_EXCL</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EPNEM">Example 53-1. Using <span class="docEmphasis">sem_open()</span> to open or create a POSIX named semaphore</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>psem/psem_create.c</b>
#include &lt;semaphore.h&gt;
#include &lt;sys/stat.h&gt;
#include &lt;fcntl.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

static void
usageError(const char *progName)
{
    fprintf(stderr, "Usage: %s [-cx] name [octal-perms [value]]\n", progName);
    fprintf(stderr, "    -c   Create semaphore (O_CREAT)\n");
    fprintf(stderr, "    -x   Create exclusively (O_EXCL)\n");
    exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int flags, opt;
    mode_t perms;
    unsigned int value;
    sem_t *sem;

    flags = 0;
    while ((opt = getopt(argc, argv, "cx")) != -1) {
        switch (opt) {
        case 'c':   flags |= O_CREAT;           break;
        case 'x':   flags |= O_EXCL;            break;
        default:    usageError(argv[0]);
        }
    }

    if (optind &gt;= argc)
        usageError(argv[0]);

    /* Default permissions are rw-------; default semaphore initialization
       value is 0 */

    perms = (argc &lt;= optind + 1) ? (S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR) :
                getInt(argv[optind + 1], GN_BASE_8, "octal-perms");
    value = (argc &lt;= optind + 2) ? 0 : getInt(argv[optind + 2], 0, "value");

    sem = sem_open(argv[optind], flags, perms, value);
    if (sem == SEM_FAILED)
        errExit("sem_open");

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
    <b>psem/psem_create.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4NEM">53.2.2. Closing a Semaphore</h4><p class="docText">When a process opens a named semaphore, the system records the association between the process and the semaphore. The <span class="docEmphasis">sem_close()</span>
 function terminates this association (i.e., closes the semaphore), 
releases any resources that the system has associated with the semaphore
 for this process, and decreases the count of processes referencing the 
semaphore.</p><pre>#include &lt;semaphore.h&gt;

int <b>sem_close</b>(sem_t *<span class="docEmphasis">sem</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Open named semaphores are also automatically closed on process termination or if the process performs an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>.</p><p class="docText">Closing a semaphore does not delete it. For that purpose, we need to use <span class="docEmphasis">sem_unlink()</span>.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ELQEM">53.2.3. Removing a Named Semaphore</h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sem_unlink()</span> function removes the semaphore identified by <span class="docEmphasis">name</span>
 and marks the semaphore to be destroyed once all processes cease using 
it (this may mean immediately, if all processes that had the semaphore 
open have already closed it).</p><pre>#include &lt;semaphore.h&gt;

int <b>sem_unlink</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">name</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Example 53-2 demonstrates the use of <span class="docEmphasis">sem_unlink()</span>.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EJREM">Example 53-2. Using <span class="docEmphasis">sem_unlink()</span> to unlink a POSIX named semaphore</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre><b>psem/psem_unlink.c</b>
#include &lt;semaphore.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    if (argc != 2 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s sem-name\n", argv[0]);

    if (sem_unlink(argv[1]) == -1)
        errExit("sem_unlink");
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
    <b>psem/psem_unlink.c</b></pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
