<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>53.3. Semaphore Operations</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">53.3. Semaphore Operations</h3><p class="docText">As
 with a System V semaphore, a POSIX semaphore is an integer that the 
system never allows to go below 0. However, POSIX semaphore operations 
differ from their System V counterparts in the following respects:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The functions for changing a semaphore’s value—<span class="docEmphasis">sem_post()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait()</span>—operate on just one semaphore at a time. By contrast, the System V <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> system call can operate on multiple semaphores in a set.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">sem_post()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait()</span> functions increment and decrement a semaphore’s value by exactly one. By contrast, <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> can add and subtract arbitrary values.</p></li><li><p class="docList">There is no equivalent of the wait-for-zero operation provided by System V semaphores (a <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> call where the <span class="docEmphasis">sops.sem_op</span> field is specified as 0).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">From
 this list, it may seem that POSIX semaphores are less powerful than 
System V semaphores. However, this is not the case--anything that we can
 do with System V semaphores can also be done with POSIX semaphores. In a
 few cases, a bit more programming effort may be required, but, for 
typical scenarios, using POSIX semaphores actually requires less 
programming effort. (The System V semaphore API is rather more 
complicated than is required for most applications.)</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EHGEM">53.3.1. Waiting on a Semaphore</h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait()</span> function decrements (decreases by 1) the value of the semaphore referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">sem</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;semaphore.h&gt;

int <b>sem_wait </b>(sem_t *<i> sem</i>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If the semaphore currently has a value greater than 0, <span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait()</span> returns immediately. If the value of the semaphore is currently 0, <span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait()</span> blocks until the semaphore value rises above 0; at that time, the semaphore is then decremented and <span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait()</span> returns.</p><p class="docText">If a blocked <span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait()</span> call is interrupted by a signal handler, then it fails with the error <tt>EINTR</tt>, regardless of whether the <tt>SA_RESTART</tt> flag was used when establishing the signal handler with <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span>. (On some other UNIX implementations, <tt>SA_RESTART</tt> does cause <span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait()</span> to automatically restart.)</p><p class="docText">The program in Example 53-3 provides a command-line interface to the <span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait()</span> function. We demonstrate the use of this program shortly.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EHJEM">Example 53-3. Using <span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait()</span> to decrement a POSIX semaphore</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre><b>psem/psem_wait.c</b>
#include &lt;semaphore.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    sem_t *sem;

    if (argc &lt; 2 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s sem-name\n", argv[0]);

    sem = sem_open(argv[1], 0);
    if (sem == SEM_FAILED)
        errExit("sem_open");

    if (sem_wait(sem) == -1)
        errExit("sem_wait");

    printf("%ld sem_wait() succeeded\n", (long) getpid());
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
    <b>psem/psem_wait.c</b></pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sem_trywait()</span> function is a nonblocking version of <span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait()</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;semaphore.h&gt;

int <b>sem_trywait</b>(sem_t *<span class="docEmphasis">sem</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If the decrement operation can’t be performed immediately, <span class="docEmphasis">sem_trywait()</span> fails with the error <tt>EAGAIN</tt>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sem_timedwait()</span> function is another variation on <span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait()</span>. It allows the caller to specify a limit on the time for which the call will block.</p><pre>#include &lt;semaphore.h&gt;

int <b>sem_timedwait</b>(sem_t *<span class="docEmphasis">sem</span>, const struct timespec *<span class="docEmphasis">abs_timeout</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If a <span class="docEmphasis">sem_timedwait()</span> call times out without being able to decrement the semaphore, then the call fails with the error <tt>ETIMEDOUT</tt>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">abs_timeout</span> argument is a <span class="docEmphasis">timespec</span> structure (Section 23.4.2)
 that specifies the timeout as an absolute value in seconds and 
nanoseconds since the Epoch. If we want to perform a relative timeout, 
then we must fetch the current value of the <tt>CLOCK_REALTIME</tt> clock using <span class="docEmphasis">clock_gettime()</span> and add the required amount to that value to produce a <span class="docEmphasis">timespec</span> structure suitable for use with <span class="docEmphasis">sem_timedwait()</span>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sem_timedwait()</span> function was originally specified in POSIX.1d (1999) and is not available on all UNIX implementations.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EXMEM">53.3.2. Posting a Semaphore</h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sem_post()</span> function increments (increases by 1) the value of the semaphore referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">sem</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;semaphore.h&gt;

int <b>sem_post</b>(sem_t *<span class="docEmphasis">sem</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If the value of the semaphore was 0 before the <span class="docEmphasis">sem_post()</span> call, and some other process (or thread) is blocked waiting to decrement the semaphore, then that process is awoken, and its <span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait()</span> call proceeds to decrement the semaphore. If multiple processes (or threads) are blocked in <span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait()</span>,
 then, if the processes are being scheduled under the default 
round-robin time-sharing policy, it is indeterminate which one will be 
awoken and allowed to decrement the semaphore. (Like their System V 
counterparts, POSIX semaphores are only a synchronization mechanism, not
 a queuing mechanism.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">SUSv3
 specifies that if processes or threads are being executed under a 
realtime scheduling policy, then the process or thread that will be 
awoken is the one with the highest priority that has been waiting the 
longest.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">As
 with System V semaphores, incrementing a POSIX semaphore corresponds to
 releasing some shared resource for use by another process or thread.</p><p class="docText">The program in Example 53-4 provides a command-line interface to the <span class="docEmphasis">sem_post()</span> function. We demonstrate the use of this program shortly.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EIPEM">Example 53-4. Using <span class="docEmphasis">sem_post()</span> to increment a POSIX semaphore</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre><b>psem/psem_post.c</b>
#include &lt;semaphore.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    sem_t *sem;

    if (argc != 2)
        usageErr("%s sem-name\n", argv[0]);

    sem = sem_open(argv[1], 0);
    if (sem == SEM_FAILED)
        errExit("sem_open");

    if (sem_post(sem) == -1)
        errExit("sem_post");
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
    <b>psem/psem_post.c</b></pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWPEM">53.3.3. Retrieving the Current Value of a Semaphore</h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sem_getvalue()</span> function returns the current value of the semaphore referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">sem</span> in the <span class="docEmphasis">int</span> pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">sval</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;semaphore.h&gt;

int <b>sem_getvalue</b>(sem_t *<span class="docEmphasis">sem</span>, int *<span class="docEmphasis">sval</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If
 one or more processes (or threads) are currently blocked waiting to 
decrement the semaphore’s value, then the value returned in <span class="docEmphasis">sval</span>
 depends on the implementation. SUSv3 permits two possibilities: 0 or a 
negative number whose absolute value is the number of waiters blocked in
 <span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait()</span>. Linux and several other implementations adopt the former behavior; a few other implementations adopt the latter behavior.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Although returning a negative <span class="docEmphasis">sval</span>
 if there are blocked waiters can be useful, especially for debugging 
purposes, SUSv3 doesn’t require this behavior because the techniques 
that some systems use to efficiently implement POSIX semaphores don’t 
(in fact, can’t) record counts of blocked waiters.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Note that by the time <span class="docEmphasis">sem_getvalue()</span> returns, the value returned in <span class="docEmphasis">sval</span> may already be out of date. A program that depends on the information returned by <span class="docEmphasis">sem_getvalue()</span> being unchanged by the time of a subsequent operation will be subject to time-of-check, time-of-use race conditions (Section 38.6).</p><p class="docText">The program in Example 53-5 uses <span class="docEmphasis">sem_getvalue()</span> to retrieve the value of the semaphore named in its command-line argument, and then displays that value on standard output.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EZSEM">Example 53-5. Using <span class="docEmphasis">sem_getvalue()</span> to retrieve the value of a POSIX semaphore</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre><b>psem/psem_getvalue.c</b>
#include &lt;semaphore.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int value;
    sem_t *sem;

    if (argc != 2)
        usageErr("%s sem-name\n", argv[0]);

    sem = sem_open(argv[1], 0);
    if (sem == SEM_FAILED)
        errExit("sem_open");

    if (sem_getvalue(sem, &amp;value) == -1)
        errExit("sem_getvalue");

    printf("%d\n", value);
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
    <b>psem/psem_getvalue.c</b></pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EHTEM">53.3.3.1. Example</h5><p class="docText">The
 following shell session log demonstrates the use of the programs we 
have shown so far in this chapter. We begin by creating a semaphore 
whose initial value is zero, and then start a program in the background 
that attempts to decrement the semaphore:</p><pre>$ <b>./psem_create -c /demo 600 0</b>
$ <b>./psem_wait /demo &amp;</b>
[1] 31208</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The background command blocks, because the semaphore value is currently 0 and therefore can’t be decreased.</p><p class="docText">We then retrieve the semaphore value:</p><pre>$ <b>./psem_getvalue /demo</b>
0</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We see the value 0 above. On 
some other implementations, we might see the value -1, indicating that 
one process is waiting on the semaphore.</p><p class="docText">We then execute a command that increments the semaphore. This causes the blocked <span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait()</span> in the background program to complete:</p><pre>$ <b>./psem_post /demo</b>
$ 31208 sem_wait() succeeded</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">(The last line of output above shows the shell prompt mixed with the output of the background job.)</p><p class="docText">We press <span class="docEmphasis">Enter</span>
 to see the next shell prompt, which also causes the shell to report on 
the terminated background job, and then perform further operations on 
the semaphore:</p><pre><i> Press Enter</i>
[1]-  Done          ./psem_wait /demo
$ <b>./psem_post /demo </b> <i> Increment semaphore</i>
$ <b>./psem_getvalue /demo </b> <i> Retrieve semaphore value</i>
1
$ <b>./psem_unlink /demo </b> <i> We’re done with this semaphore</i></pre><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
