<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>53.4. Unnamed Semaphores</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">53.4. Unnamed Semaphores</h3><p class="docText">Unnamed semaphores (also known as <span class="docEmphasis">memory-based semaphores</span>) are variables of type <span class="docEmphasis">sem_t</span>
 that are stored in memory allocated by the application. The semaphore 
is made available to the processes or threads that use it by placing it 
in an area of memory that they share.</p><p class="docText">Operations on unnamed semaphores use the same functions (<span class="docEmphasis">sem_wait()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">sem_post()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">sem_getvalue()</span>, and so on) that are used to operate on named semaphores. In addition, two further functions are required:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">sem_init()</span>
 function initializes a semaphore and informs the system of whether the 
semaphore will be shared between processes or between the threads of a 
single process.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">sem_destroy(sem)</span> function destroys a semaphore.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">These functions should not be used with named semaphores.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETHEM">53.4.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EXHEM">53.4.1.1. Unnamed versus named semaphores</h5><p class="docText">Using
 an unnamed semaphore allows us to avoid the work of creating a name for
 a semaphore. This can be useful in the following cases:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">A
 semaphore that is shared between threads doesn’t need a name. Making an
 unnamed semaphore a shared (global or heap) variable automatically 
makes it accessible to all threads.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A
 semaphore that is being shared between related processes doesn’t need a
 name. If a parent process allocates an unnamed semaphore in a region of
 shared memory (e.g., a shared anonymous mapping), then a child 
automatically inherits the mapping and thus the semaphore as part of the
 operation of <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If
 we are building a dynamic data structure (e.g., a binary tree), each of
 whose items requires an associated semaphore, then the simplest 
approach is to allocate an unnamed semaphore within each item. Opening a
 named semaphore for each item would require us to design a convention 
for generating a (unique) semaphore name for each item and to manage 
those names (e.g., unlinking them when they are no longer required).</p></li></ul><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGIEM">53.4.2. Initializing an Unnamed Semaphore</h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sem_init()</span> function initializes the unnamed semaphore pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">sem</span> to the value specified by <span class="docEmphasis">value</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;semaphore.h&gt;

int <b>sem_init</b>(sem_t *<span class="docEmphasis">sem</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">pshared</span>, unsigned int <span class="docEmphasis">value</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pshared</span> argument indicates whether the semaphore is to be shared between threads or between processes.</p><ul><li><p class="docList">If <span class="docEmphasis">pshared</span> is 0, then the semaphore is to be shared between the threads of the calling process. In this case, <span class="docEmphasis">sem</span>
 is typically specified as the address of either a global variable or a 
variable allocated on the heap. A thread-shared semaphore has process 
persistence; it is destroyed when the process terminates.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If <span class="docEmphasis">pshared</span> is nonzero, then the semaphore is to be shared between processes. In this case, <span class="docEmphasis">sem</span> must be the address of a location in a region of shared memory (a POSIX shared memory object, a shared mapping created using <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span>,
 or a System V shared memory segment). The semaphore persists as long as
 the shared memory in which it resides. (The shared memory regions 
created by most of these techniques have kernel persistence. The 
exception is shared anonymous mappings, which persist only as long as at
 least one process maintains the mapping.) Since a child produced via <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> inherits its parent’s memory mappings, process-shared semaphores are inherited by the child of a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, and the parent and child can use these semaphores to synchronize their actions.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">pshared</span> argument is necessary for the following reasons:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Some implementations don’t support process-shared semaphores. On these systems, specifying a nonzero value for <span class="docEmphasis">pshared</span> causes <span class="docEmphasis">sem_init()</span>
 to return an error. Linux did not support unnamed process-shared 
semaphores until kernel 2.6 and the advent of the NPTL threading 
implementation. (The older LinuxThreads implementation of <span class="docEmphasis">sem_init()</span> fails with the error <tt>ENOSYS</tt> if a nonzero value is specified for <span class="docEmphasis">pshared</span>.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">On
 implementations that support both process-shared and thread-shared 
semaphores, specifying which kind of sharing is required may be 
necessary because the system must take special actions to support the 
requested sharing. Providing this information may also permit the system
 to perform optimizations depending on the type of sharing.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The NPTL <span class="docEmphasis">sem_init()</span> implementation ignores <span class="docEmphasis">pshared</span>,
 since no special action is required for either type of sharing. 
Nevertheless, portable and future-proof applications should specify an 
appropriate value for <span class="docEmphasis">pshared</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The SUSv3 specification for <span class="docEmphasis">sem_init()</span>
 defines a failure return of -1, but makes no statement about the return
 value on success. Nevertheless, the manual pages on most modern UNIX 
implementations document a 0 return on success. (One notable exception 
is Solaris, where the description of the return value is similar to the 
SUSv3 specification. However, inspecting the OpenSolaris source code 
shows that, on that implementation, <span class="docEmphasis">sem_init()</span> does return 0 on success.) SUSv4 rectifies the situation, specifying that <span class="docEmphasis">sem_init()</span> shall return 0 on success.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">There are no permission settings associated with an unnamed semaphore (i.e., <span class="docEmphasis">sem_init()</span> has no analog of the <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> argument of <span class="docEmphasis">sem_open()</span>).
 Access to an unnamed semaphore is governed by the permissions that are 
granted to the process for the underlying shared memory region.</p><p class="docText">SUSv3
 specifies that initializing an already initialized unnamed semaphore 
results in undefined behavior. In other words, we must design our 
applications so that just one process or thread calls <span class="docEmphasis">sem_init()</span> to initialize a semaphore.</p><p class="docText">As with named semaphores, SUSv3 says that the results are undefined if we attempt to perform operations on a <span class="docEmphasis">copy</span> of the <span class="docEmphasis">sem_t</span> variable whose address is passed as the <span class="docEmphasis">sem</span> argument of <span class="docEmphasis">sem_init()</span>. Operations should always be performed only on the “original” semaphore.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E3MEM">53.4.2.1. Example program</h5><p class="docText">In Section 30.1.2, we presented a program (Example 30-2) that used mutexes to protect a critical section in which two threads accessed the same global variable. The program in Example 53-6 solves the same problem using an unnamed thread-shared semaphore.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EDOEM">Example 53-6. Using a POSIX unnamed semaphore to protect access to a global variable</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>psem/thread_incr_psem.c</b>
#include &lt;semaphore.h&gt;
#include &lt;pthread.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

static int glob = 0;
static sem_t sem;

static void *                   /* Loop 'arg' times incrementing 'glob' */
threadFunc(void *arg)
{
    int loops = *((int *) arg);
    int loc, j;

    for (j = 0; j &lt; loops; j++) {
        if (sem_wait(&amp;sem) == -1)
            errExit("sem_wait");

        loc = glob;
        loc++;
        glob = loc;

        if (sem_post(&amp;sem) == -1)
            errExit("sem_post");
    }

    return NULL;
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    pthread_t t1, t2;
    int loops, s;

    loops = (argc &gt; 1) ? getInt(argv[1], GN_GT_0, "num-loops") : 10000000;

    /* Initialize a thread-shared mutex with the value 1 */

    if (sem_init(&amp;sem, 0, 1) == -1)
        errExit("sem_init");

    /* Create two threads that increment 'glob' */

    s = pthread_create(&amp;t1, NULL, threadFunc, &amp;loops);
    if (s != 0)
        errExitEN(s, "pthread_create");
    s = pthread_create(&amp;t2, NULL, threadFunc, &amp;loops);
    if (s != 0)
        errExitEN(s, "pthread_create");

    /* Wait for threads to terminate */

    s = pthread_join(t1, NULL);
    if (s != 0)
        errExitEN(s, "pthread_join");
    s = pthread_join(t2, NULL);
    if (s != 0)
        errExitEN(s, "pthread_join");

    printf("glob = %d\n", glob);
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
    <b>psem/thread_incr_psem.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EOOEM">53.4.3. Destroying an Unnamed Semaphore</h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sem_destroy()</span> function destroys the semaphore <span class="docEmphasis">sem</span>, which must be an unnamed semaphore that was previously initialized using <span class="docEmphasis">sem_init()</span>. It is safe to destroy a semaphore only if no processes or threads are waiting on it.</p><pre>#include &lt;semaphore.h&gt;

int <b>sem_destroy </b>(sem_t *<i> sem</i>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">After an unnamed semaphore segment has been destroyed with <span class="docEmphasis">sem_destroy()</span>, it can be reinitialized with <span class="docEmphasis">sem_init()</span>.</p><p class="docText">An
 unnamed semaphore should be destroyed before its underlying memory is 
deallocated. For example, if the semaphore is an automatically allocated
 variable, it should be destroyed before its host function returns. If 
the semaphore resides in a POSIX shared memory region, then it should be
 destroyed after all processes have ceased using the semaphore and 
before the shared memory object is unlinked with <span class="docEmphasis">shm_unlink()</span>.</p><p class="docText">On some implementations, omitting calls to <span class="docEmphasis">sem_destroy()</span> doesn’t cause problems. However, on other implementations, failing to call <span class="docEmphasis">sem_destroy()</span> can result in resource leaks. Portable applications should call <span class="docEmphasis">sem_destroy()</span> to avoid such problems.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
