<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>53.5. Comparisons with Other Synchronization Techniques</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">53.5. Comparisons with Other Synchronization Techniques</h3><p class="docText">In this section, we compare POSIX semaphores with two other synchronization techniques: System V semaphores and mutexes.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDJEM">53.5.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EHJEM">53.5.1.1. POSIX semaphores versus System V semaphores</h5><p class="docText">POSIX semaphores and System V semaphores can both be used to synchronize the actions of processes. Section 51.2
 listed various advantages of POSIX IPC over System V IPC: the POSIX IPC
 interface is simpler and more consistent with the traditional UNIX file
 model, and POSIX IPC objects are reference counted, which simplifies 
the task of determining when to delete an IPC object. These general 
advantages also apply to the specific case of POSIX (named) semaphores 
versus System V semaphores.</p><p class="docText">POSIX semaphores have the following further advantages over System V semaphores:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The
 POSIX semaphore interface is much simpler than the System V semaphore 
interface. This simplicity is achieved without loss of functional power.</p></li><li><p class="docList">POSIX named semaphores eliminate the initialization problem associated with System V semaphores (Section 47.5).</p></li><li><p class="docList">It
 is easier to associate a POSIX unnamed semaphore with a dynamically 
allocated memory object: the semaphore can simply be embedded inside the
 object.</p></li><li><p class="docList">In 
scenarios where there is a high degree of contention for a semaphore 
(i.e., operations on the semaphore are frequently blocked because 
another process has set the semaphore to a value that prevents the 
operation proceeding immediately), then the performance of POSIX 
semaphores and System V semaphores is similar. However, in cases where 
there is low contention for a semaphore (i.e., the semaphore’s value is 
such that operations can normally proceed without blocking), then POSIX 
semaphores perform considerably better than System V semaphores. (On the
 systems tested by the author, the difference in performance is more 
than an order of magnitude; see Exercise 53-4.) POSIX semaphores perform
 so much better in this case because the way in which they are 
implemented only requires a system call when contention occurs, whereas 
System V semaphore operations always require a system call, regardless 
of contention.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">However, POSIX semaphores also have the following disadvantages compared to System V semaphores:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">POSIX semaphores are somewhat less portable. (On Linux, named semaphores have been supported only since kernel 2.6.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">POSIX semaphores don’t provide an equivalent of the System V semaphore undo feature. (However, as we noted in Section 47.8, this feature may not be useful in some circumstances.)</p></li></ul><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EOKEM">53.5.1.2. POSIX semaphores versus Pthreads mutexes</h5><p class="docText">POSIX
 semaphores and Pthreads mutexes can both be used to synchronize the 
actions of threads within the same process, and their performance is 
similar. However, mutexes are usually preferable, because the ownership 
property of mutexes enforces good structuring of code (only the thread 
that locks a mutex can unlock it). By contrast, one thread can increment
 a semaphore that was decremented by another thread. This flexibility 
can lead to poorly structured synchronization designs. (For this reason,
 semaphores are sometimes referred to as the “gotos” of concurrent 
programming.)</p><p class="docText">There
 is one circumstance in which mutexes can’t be used in a multithreaded 
application and semaphores may therefore be preferable. Because it is 
async-signal-safe (see Table 21-1, in Section 21.1.2.3), the <span class="docEmphasis">sem_post()</span>
 function can be used from within a signal handler to synchronize with 
another thread. This is not possible with mutexes, because the Pthreads 
functions for operating on mutexes are not async-signal-safe. However, 
because it is usually preferable to deal with asynchronous signals by 
accepting them using <span class="docEmphasis">sigwaitinfo()</span> (or similar), rather than using signal handlers (see Section 33.2.4), this advantage of semaphores over mutexes is seldom required.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
