<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>53.7. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">53.7. Summary</h3><p class="docText">POSIX
 semaphores allow processes or threads to synchronize their actions. 
POSIX semaphores come in two types: named and unnamed. A named semaphore
 is identified by a name, and can be shared by any processes that have 
permission to open the semaphore. An unnamed semaphore has no name, but 
processes or threads can share the same semaphore by placing it in a 
region of memory that they share (e.g., in a POSIX shared memory object 
for process sharing, or in a global variable for thread sharing).</p><p class="docText">The
 POSIX semaphore interface is simpler than the System V semaphore 
interface. Semaphores are allocated and operated on individually, and 
the wait and post operations adjust a semaphore’s value by one.</p><p class="docText">POSIX
 semaphores have a number of advantages over System V semaphores, but 
they are somewhat less portable. For synchronization within 
multithreaded applications, mutexes are generally preferred over 
semaphores.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ELKEM">53.7.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EPKEM">53.7.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">[Stevens,
 1999] provides an alternative presentation of POSIX semaphores and 
shows user-space implementations using various other IPC mechanisms 
(FIFOs, memory-mapped files, and System V semaphores). [Butenhof, 1996] 
describes the use of POSIX semaphores in multithreaded applications.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
