<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 54. POSIX Shared Memory</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0EFLEM">Chapter 54. POSIX Shared Memory</h2><p class="docText">In
 previous chapters, we looked at two techniques that allow unrelated 
processes to share memory regions in order to perform IPC: System V 
shared memory (Chapter 48) and shared file mappings (Section 49.4.2). Both of these techniques have potential drawbacks:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The
 System V shared memory model, which uses keys and identifiers, is not 
consistent with the standard UNIX I/O model, which uses filenames and 
descriptors. This difference means that we require an entirely new set 
of system calls and commands for working with System V shared memory 
segments.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Using
 a shared file mapping for IPC requires the creation of a disk file, 
even if we are not interested in having a persistent backing store for 
the shared region. Aside from the inconvenience of needing to create the
 file, this technique incurs some file I/O overhead.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Because of these drawbacks, POSIX.1b defined a new shared memory API: POSIX shared memory, which is the subject of this chapter.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">POSIX talks about shared memory <span class="docEmphasis">objects</span>, while System V talks about shared memory <span class="docEmphasis">segments</span>.
 These differences in terminology are historical—both terms are used for
 referring to regions of memory shared between processes.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
