<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>54.1. Overview</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">54.1. Overview</h3><p class="docText">POSIX
 shared memory allows to us to share a mapped region between unrelated 
processes without needing to create a corresponding mapped file. POSIX 
shared memory is supported on Linux since kernel 2.4.</p><p class="docText">SUSv3
 doesn’t specify any of the details of how POSIX shared memory is to be 
implemented. In particular, there is no requirement for the use of a 
(real or virtual) file system to identify shared memory objects, 
although many UNIX implementations do employ a file system for this 
purpose. Some UNIX implementations create the names for shared memory 
objects as files in a special location in the standard file system. 
Linux uses a dedicated <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfs</span> file system (Section 14.10) mounted under the directory <tt>/dev/shm</tt>.
 This file system has kernel persistence--the shared memory objects that
 it contains will persist even if no process currently has them open, 
but they will be lost if the system is shut down.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The total amount of memory in all POSIX shared memory regions on the system is limited by the size of the underlying <span class="docEmphasis">tmpfs</span>
 file system. This file system is typically mounted at boot time with 
some default size (e.g., 256 MB). If necessary, the superuser can change
 the size of the file system by remounting it using the command <span class="docEmphasis">mount -o remount,size=&lt;num-bytes&gt;</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">To use a POSIX shared memory object, we perform two steps:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Use the <span class="docEmphasis">shm_open()</span>
 function to open an object with a specified name. (We described the 
rules governing the naming of POSIX shared memory objects in Section 
51.1.) The <span class="docEmphasis">shm_open()</span> function is analogous to the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> system call. It either creates a new shared memory object or opens an existing object. As its function result, <span class="docEmphasis">shm_open()</span> returns a file descriptor referring to the object.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Pass the file descriptor obtained in the previous step in a call to <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> that specifies <tt>MAP_SHARED</tt> in the <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> argument. This maps the shared memory object into the process’s virtual address space. As with other uses of <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span>,
 once we have mapped the object, we can close the file descriptor 
without affecting the mapping. However, we may need to keep the file 
descriptor open for subsequent use in calls to <span class="docEmphasis">fstat()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ftruncate()</span> (see Section 54.2).</p></div></li></ol></div><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The relationship between <span class="docEmphasis">shm_open()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> for POSIX shared memory is analogous to that between <span class="docEmphasis">shmget()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">shmat()</span> for System V shared memory. The origin of the two-step process (<span class="docEmphasis">shm_open()</span> plus <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span>)
 for using POSIX shared memory objects instead of the use of a single 
function that performs both tasks is historical. When the POSIX 
committee added this feature, the <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> call already existed ([Stevens, 1999]). In effect, all that we are doing is replacing calls to <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> with calls to <span class="docEmphasis">shm_open()</span>, with the difference that using <span class="docEmphasis">shm_open()</span> doesn’t require the creation of a file in a disk-based file system.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Since
 a shared memory object is referred to using a file descriptor, we can 
usefully employ various file descriptor system calls already defined in 
the UNIX system (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">ftruncate()</span>), rather than needing new special-purpose system calls (as is required for System V shared memory).</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
