<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>54.5. Comparisons Between Shared Memory APIs</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">54.5. Comparisons Between Shared Memory APIs</h3><p class="docText">By now, we have considered a number of different techniques for sharing memory regions between unrelated processes:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">System V shared memory (Chapter 48);</p></li><li><p class="docList">shared file mappings (Section 49.4.2); and</p></li><li><p class="docList">POSIX shared memory objects (the subject of this chapter).</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Many of the points that we make in this section are also relevant for shared anonymous mappings (Section 49.7), which are used for sharing memory between processes that are related via <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">A number of points apply to all of these techniques:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">They
 provide fast IPC, and applications typically must use a semaphore (or 
other synchronization primitive) to synchronize access to the shared 
region.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Once 
the shared memory region has been mapped into the process’s virtual 
address space, it looks just like any other part of the process’s memory
 space.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The
 system places the shared memory regions within the process virtual 
address space in a similar manner. We outlined this placement while 
describing System V shared memory in Section 48.5. The Linux-specific <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span><tt>/maps</tt> file lists information about all types of shared memory regions.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Assuming
 that we don’t attempt to map a shared memory region at a fixed address,
 we should ensure that all references to locations in the region are 
calculated as offsets (rather than pointers), since the region may be 
located at different virtual addresses within different processes (Section 48.6).</p></li><li><p class="docList">The functions described in Chapter 50 that operate on regions of virtual memory can be applied to shared memory regions created using any of these techniques.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">There are also a few notable differences between the techniques for shared memory:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The
 fact that the contents of a shared file mapping are synchronized with 
the underlying mapped file means that the data stored in a shared memory
 region can persist across system restarts.</p></li><li><p class="docList">System
 V and POSIX shared memory use different mechanisms to identify and 
refer to a shared memory object. System V uses its own scheme of keys 
and identifiers, which doesn’t fit with the standard UNIX I/O model and 
requires separate system calls (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">shmctl()</span>) and commands (<span class="docEmphasis">ipcs</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ipcrm</span>).
 By contrast, POSIX shared memory employs names and file descriptors, 
and consequently shared memory objects can be examined and manipulated 
using a variety of existing UNIX system calls (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">fstat()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fchmod()</span>).</p></li><li><p class="docList">The size of a System V shared memory segment is fixed at the time of creation (via <span class="docEmphasis">shmget()</span>). By contrast, for a mapping backed by a file or by a POSIX shared memory object, we can use <span class="docEmphasis">ftruncate()</span> to adjust the size of the underlying object, and then re-create the mapping using <span class="docEmphasis">munmap()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> (or the Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">mremap()</span>).</p></li><li><p class="docList">Historically, System V shared memory was more widely available than <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> and POSIX shared memory, although most UNIX implementations now provide all of these techniques.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">With
 the exception of the final point regarding portability, the differences
 listed above are advantages in favor of shared file mappings and POSIX 
shared memory objects. Thus, in new applications, one of these 
interfaces may be preferable to System V shared memory. Which one we 
choose depends on whether or not we require a persistent backing store. 
Shared file mappings provide such a store; POSIX shared memory objects 
allow us to avoid the overhead of using a disk file when a backing store
 is not required.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
