<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>55.2. File Locking with flock()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">55.2. File Locking with <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span></h3><p class="docText">Although <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> provides a superset of the functionality provided by <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span>, we nevertheless describe <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> because it is still used in some applications, and because it differs from <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> in some of the semantics of inheritance and release of locks.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/file.h&gt;

int <b>flock</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">operation</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> system call places a single lock on an entire file. The file to be locked is specified via an open file descriptor passed in <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">operation</span> argument specifies one of the values <tt>LOCK_SH</tt>, <tt>LOCK_EX</tt>, or <tt>LOCK_UN</tt>, which are described in Table 55-1.</p><p class="docText">By default, <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> blocks if another process already holds an incompatible lock on a file. If we want to prevent this, we can OR (<tt>|</tt>) the value <tt>LOCK_NB</tt> into <span class="docEmphasis">operation</span>. In this case, if another process already holds an incompatible lock on the file, <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> doesn’t block, but instead returns -1, with <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> set to <tt>EWOULDBLOCK</tt>.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 55-1. Values for the <span class="docEmphasis">operation</span> argument of <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span></h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Value</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>LOCK_SH</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Place a <span class="docEmphasis">shared</span> lock on the file referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>LOCK_EX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Place an <span class="docEmphasis">exclusive</span> lock on the file referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>LOCK_UN</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Unlock the file referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>LOCK_NB</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Make a nonblocking lock request</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">Any
 number of processes may simultaneously hold a shared lock on a file. 
However, only one process at a time can hold an exclusive lock on a 
file. (In other words, exclusive locks deny both exclusive and shared 
locks by other processes.) Table 55-2 summarizes the compatibility rules for <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span>
 locks. Here, we assume that process A is the first to place the lock, 
and the table indicates whether process B can then place a lock.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 55-2. Compatibility of <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> locking types</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" rowspan="2" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom">Process A</th><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" colspan="2" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="top">Process B</th></tr><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top"><tt>LOCK_SH</tt></th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top"><tt>LOCK_EX</tt></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>LOCK_SH</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>LOCK_EX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">A process can place a shared or exclusive lock regardless of the access mode (read, write, or read-write) of the file.</p><p class="docText">An existing shared lock can be converted to an exclusive lock (and vice versa) by making another call to <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> specifying the appropriate value for <span class="docEmphasis">operation</span>. Converting a shared lock to an exclusive lock will block if another process holds a shared lock on the file, unless <tt>LOCK_NB</tt> was also specified.</p><p class="docText">A lock conversion is <span class="docEmphasis">not</span>
 guaranteed to be atomic. During conversion, the existing lock is first 
removed, and then a new lock is established. Between these two steps, 
another process’s pending request for an incompatible lock may be 
granted. If this occurs, then the conversion will block, or, if <tt>LOCK_NB</tt>
 was specified, the conversion will fail and the process will lose its 
original lock. (This behavior occurred in the original BSD <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> implementation and also occurs on many other UNIX implementations.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Although it is not part of SUSv3, <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> appears on most UNIX implementations. Some implementations require the inclusion of either <tt>&lt;fcntl.h&gt;</tt> or <tt>&lt;sys/fcntl.h&gt;</tt> instead of <tt>&lt;sys/file.h&gt;</tt>. Because <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> originates on BSD, the locks that it places are sometimes known as <span class="docEmphasis">BSD file locks</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Example 55-1 demonstrates the use of <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span>.
 This program locks a file, sleeps for a specified number of seconds, 
and then unlocks the file. The program takes up to three command-line 
arguments. The first of these is the file to lock. The second specifies 
the lock type (shared or exclusive) and whether or not to include the <tt>LOCK_NB</tt>
 (nonblocking) flag. The third argument specifies the number of seconds 
to sleep between acquiring and releasing the lock; this argument is 
optional and defaults to 10 seconds.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E35EM">Example 55-1. Using <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>filelock/t_flock.c</b>
#include &lt;sys/file.h&gt;
#include &lt;fcntl.h&gt;
#include "curr_time.h"                  /* Declaration of currTime() */
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int fd, lock;
    const char *lname;

    if (argc &lt; 3 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0 ||
            strchr("sx", argv[2][0]) == NULL)
        usageErr("%s file lock [sleep-time]\n"
                 "    'lock' is 's' (shared) or 'x' (exclusive)\n"
                 "        optionally followed by 'n' (nonblocking)\n"
                 "    'secs' specifies time to hold lock\n", argv[0]);

    lock = (argv[2][0] == 's') ? LOCK_SH : LOCK_EX;
    if (argv[2][1] == 'n')
        lock |= LOCK_NB;

    fd = open(argv[1], O_RDONLY);               /* Open file to be locked */
    if (fd == -1)
        errExit("open");

    lname = (lock &amp; LOCK_SH) ? "LOCK_SH" : "LOCK_EX";

    printf("PID %ld: requesting %s at %s\n", (long) getpid(), lname,
            currTime("%T"));

    if (flock(fd, lock) == -1) {
        if (errno == EWOULDBLOCK)
            fatal("PID %ld: already locked - bye!", (long) getpid());
        else
            errExit("flock (PID=%ld)", (long) getpid());
    }

    printf("PID %ld: granted    %s at %s\n", (long) getpid(), lname,
            currTime("%T"));

    sleep((argc &gt; 3) ? getInt(argv[3], GN_NONNEG, "sleep-time") : 10);

    printf("PID %ld: releasing  %s at %s\n", (long) getpid(), lname,
            currTime("%T"));
    if (flock(fd, LOCK_UN) == -1)
        errExit("flock");

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
    <b>filelock/t_flock.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">Using the program in Example 55-1, we can conduct a number of experiments to explore the behavior of <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span>.
 Some examples are shown in the following shell session. We begin by 
creating a file, and then start an instance of our program that sits in 
the background and holds a shared lock for 60 seconds:</p><pre>$ <b>touch tfile</b>
$ <b>./t_flock tfile s 60 &amp;</b>
[1] 9777
PID 9777: requesting LOCK_SH at 21:19:37
PID 9777: granted    LOCK_SH at 21:19:37</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Next, we start another instance of the program that successfully requests a shared lock and then releases it:</p><pre>$ <b>./t_flock tfile s 2</b>
PID 9778: requesting LOCK_SH at 21:19:49
PID 9778: granted    LOCK_SH at 21:19:49
PID 9778: releasing  LOCK_SH at 21:19:51</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">However, when we start 
another instance of the program that makes a nonblocking requests for an
 exclusive lock, the request immediately fails:</p><pre>$ <b>./t_flock tfile xn</b>
PID 9779: requesting LOCK_EX at 21:20:03
PID 9779: already locked - bye!</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">When we start another 
instance of the program that makes a blocking request for an exclusive 
lock, the program blocks. When the background process that was holding a
 shared lock for 60 seconds releases its lock, the blocked request is 
granted:</p><pre>$ <b>./t_flock tfile x</b>
PID 9780: requesting LOCK_EX at 21:20:21
PID 9777: releasing  LOCK_SH at 21:20:37
PID 9780: granted    LOCK_EX at 21:20:37
PID 9780: releasing  LOCK_EX at 21:20:47</pre><br/>
<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETAFM">55.2.1. Semantics of Lock Inheritance and Release</h4><p class="docText">As shown in Table 55-1, we can release a file lock via an <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> call that specifies <span class="docEmphasis">operation</span> as <tt>LOCK_UN</tt>.
 In addition, locks are automatically released when the corresponding 
file descriptor is closed. However, the story is more complicated than 
this. A file lock obtained via <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> is associated with the open file description (Section 5.4), rather than the file descriptor or the file (i-node) itself. This means that when a file descriptor is duplicated (via <span class="docEmphasis">dup()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span>, or an <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> <tt>F_DUPFD</tt>
 operation), the new file descriptor refers to the same file lock. For 
example, if we have obtained a lock on the file referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, then the following code (which omits error checking) releases that lock:</p><pre>flock(fd, LOCK_EX);               /* Gain lock via 'fd' */
newfd = dup(fd);                  /* 'newfd' refers to same lock as 'fd' */
flock(newfd, LOCK_UN);            /* Frees lock acquired via 'fd' */</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If we have acquired a 
lock via a particular file descriptor, and we create one or more 
duplicates of that descriptor, then—if we don’t explicitly perform an 
unlock operation--the lock is released only when all of the duplicate 
descriptors have been closed.</p><p class="docText">However, if we use <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>
 to obtain a second file descriptor (and associated open file 
description) referring to the same file, this second descriptor is 
treated independently by <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span>. For example, a process executing the following code will block on the second <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> call:</p><pre>fd1 = open("a.txt", O_RDWR);
fd2 = open("a.txt", O_RDWR);
flock(fd1, LOCK_EX);
flock(fd2, LOCK_EX);              /* Locked out by lock on 'fd1' */</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Thus, a process can lock itself out of a file using <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span>. As we’ll see later, this can’t happen with record locks obtained by <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>.</p><p class="docText">When we create a child process using <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, that child obtains duplicates of its parent’s file descriptors, and, as with descriptors duplicated via <span class="docEmphasis">dup()</span>
 and so on, these descriptors refer to the same open file descriptions 
and thus to the same locks. For example, the following code causes a 
child to remove a parent’s lock:</p><pre>flock(fd, LOCK_EX);               /* Parent obtains lock */
if (fork() == 0)                  /* If child... */
    flock(fd, LOCK_UN);           /* Release lock shared with parent */</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">These semantics can 
sometimes be usefully exploited to (atomically) transfer a file lock 
from a parent process to a child process: after the <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>,
 the parent closes its file descriptor, and the lock is under sole 
control of the child process. As we’ll see later, this isn’t possible 
using record locks obtained by <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>.</p><p class="docText">Locks created by <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> are preserved across an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>
 (unless the close-on-exec flag was set for the file descriptor and that
 file descriptor was the last one referencing the underlying open file 
description).</p><p class="docText">The Linux semantics described above conform to the classical BSD implementation of <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span>. On some UNIX implementations, <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> is implemented using <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>, and we’ll see later that the inheritance and release semantics of <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> locks differ from those of <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> locks. Because the interactions between locks created by <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> are undefined, an application should use only one of these locking methods on a file.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EYDFM">55.2.2. Limitations of <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span></h4><p class="docText">Placing locks with <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> suffers from a number of limitations:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Only
 whole files can be locked. Such coarse locking limits the potential for
 concurrency among cooperating processes. If, for example, we have 
multiple processes, each of which would like to simultaneously access 
different parts of the same file, then locking via <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> would needlessly prevent these processes from operating concurrently.</p></li><li><p class="docList">We can place only advisory locks with <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Many NFS implementations don’t recognize locks granted by <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span>.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">All of these limitations are addressed by the locking scheme implemented by <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>, which we describe in the next section.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Historically, the Linux NFS server did not support <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> locks. Since kernel 2.6.12, the Linux NFS server supports <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> locks by implementing them as an <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>
 lock on the entire file. This can cause some strange effects when 
mixing BSD locks on the server and BSD locks on the client: the clients 
usually won’t see the server’s locks, and vice versa.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
