<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>55.5. The /proc/locks File</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">55.5. The <tt>/proc/locks</tt> File</h3><p class="docText">We can view the set of locks currently held in the system by examining the contents of the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/locks</tt> file. Here is an example of the information we can see in this file (in this case, for four locks):</p><pre>$ <b>cat /proc/locks</b>
1: POSIX  ADVISORY  WRITE 458 03:07:133880 0 EOF
2: FLOCK  ADVISORY  WRITE 404 03:07:133875 0 EOF
3: POSIX  ADVISORY  WRITE 312 03:07:133853 0 EOF
4: FLOCK  ADVISORY  WRITE 274 03:07:81908 0 EOF</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>/proc/locks</tt> file displays information about locks created by both <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>. The eight fields shown for each lock are as follows (from left to right):</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The ordinal number of the lock within the set of all locks held for this file. (Refer to Section 55.3.4.)</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The type of lock. Here, <tt>FLOCK</tt> indicates a lock created by <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span>, and <tt>POSIX</tt> indicates a lock created by <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The mode of the lock, either <tt>ADVISORY</tt> or <tt>MANDATORY</tt>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The type of lock, either <tt>READ</tt> or <tt>WRITE</tt> (corresponding to shared and exclusive locks for <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>).</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The process ID of the process holding the lock.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Three
 colon-separated numbers that identify the file on which the lock is 
held. These numbers are the major and minor device numbers of the file 
system on which the file resides, followed by the i-node number of the 
file.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The starting byte of the lock. This is always 0 for <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> locks.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The ending byte of the lock. Here, <tt>EOF</tt> indicates that the lock runs to the end of the file (i.e., <span class="docEmphasis">l_len</span> was specified as 0 for a lock created by <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>). For <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> locks, this column is always <tt>EOF</tt>.</p></div></li></ol></div><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In Linux 2.4 and earlier, each line of <tt>/proc/locks</tt>
 includes five additional hexadecimal values. These are pointer 
addresses used by the kernel to record locks in various lists. These 
values are not useful in application programs.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Using the information in <tt>/proc/locks</tt>,
 we can find out which process is holding a lock, and on what file. The 
following shell session shows how to do this for lock number 3 in the 
list above. This lock is held by process ID 312, on the i-node 133853 on
 the device with major ID 3 and minor ID 7. We begin by using <span class="docEmphasis">ps(1)</span> to list information about the process with process ID 312:</p><pre>$ <b>ps -p 312</b>
  PID TTY          TIME CMD
  312 ?        00:00:00 atd</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The above output shows that the program holding the lock is <span class="docEmphasis">atd</span>, the daemon that executes scheduled batch jobs.</p><p class="docText">In order to find the locked file, we first search the files in the <tt>/dev</tt> directory, and thus determine that the device with ID 3:7 is <tt>/dev/sda7</tt>:</p><pre>$ <b>ls -li /dev/sda7 | awk '$6 == "3," &amp;&amp; $7 == 10'</b>
  1311 brw-rw----    1 root   disk    3,  7 May 12  2006 /dev/<b>sda</b>7</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We then determine the mount point for the device <tt>/dev/sda7</tt> and search that part of the file system for the file whose i-node number is 133853:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>mount | grep sda7 </b>
/dev/sda7 on / type reiserfs (rw)             <i> Device is mounted on</i> /
$ <b>su </b>                                          <i> So we can search all directories</i>
Password:
# <b>find / -mount -inum 133853 </b>                  <i> Search for i-node 133853</i>
/var/run/atd.pid

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">find -mount</span> option prevents <span class="docEmphasis">find</span> from descending into subdirectories under <tt>/</tt> that are mount points for other file systems.</p><p class="docText">Finally, we display the contents of the locked file:</p><pre># <b>cat /var/run/atd.pid</b>
312</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Thus, we see that the <span class="docEmphasis">atd</span> daemon is holding a lock on the file <tt>/var/run/atd.pid</tt>, and that the content of this file is the process ID of the process running <span class="docEmphasis">atd</span>.
 This daemon is employing a technique to ensure that only one instance 
of the daemon is running at a time. We describe this technique in 
Section 55.6.</p><p class="docText">We can also use <tt>/proc/locks</tt> to obtain information about blocked lock requests, as demonstrated in the following output:</p><pre>$ <b>cat /proc/locks</b>
1: POSIX  ADVISORY  WRITE 11073 03:07:436283 100 109
1: -&gt; POSIX  ADVISORY  WRITE 11152 03:07:436283 100 109
2: POSIX  MANDATORY WRITE 11014 03:07:436283 0 9
2: -&gt; POSIX  MANDATORY WRITE 11024 03:07:436283 0 9
2: -&gt; POSIX  MANDATORY READ  11122 03:07:436283 0 19
3: FLOCK  ADVISORY  WRITE 10802 03:07:134447 0 EOF
3: -&gt; FLOCK  ADVISORY  WRITE 10840 03:07:134447 0 EOF</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Lines shown with the characters <tt>-&gt;</tt>
 immediately after a lock number represent lock requests blocked by the 
corresponding lock number. Thus, we see one request blocked on lock 1 
(an advisory lock created with <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>), two requests blocked on lock 2 (a mandatory lock created with <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>), and one request blocked on lock 3 (a lock created with <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span>).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <tt>/proc/locks</tt>
 file also displays information about any file leases that are held by 
processes on the system. File leases are a Linux-specific mechanism 
available in Linux 2.4 and later. If a process takes out a lease on a 
file, then it is notified (by delivery of a signal) if another process 
tries to <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">truncate()</span> that file. (The inclusion of <span class="docEmphasis">truncate()</span>
 is necessary because it is the only system call that can be used to 
change the contents of a file without first opening it.) File leases are
 provided in order to allow Samba to support the <span class="docEmphasis">opportunistic locks</span> (<span class="docEmphasis">oplocks</span>) functionality of the Microsoft SMB protocol and to allow NFS version 4 to support <span class="docEmphasis">delegations</span> (which are similar to SMB oplocks). Further details about file leases can be found under the description of the <tt>F_SETLEASE</tt> operation in the <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl(2)</span> manual page.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
