<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>55.6. Running Just One Instance of a Program</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">55.6. Running Just One Instance of a Program</h3><p class="docText">Some
 programs—in particular, many daemons—need to ensure that only one 
instance of the program is running on the system at a time. A common 
method of doing this is to have the daemon create a file in a standard 
directory and place a write lock on it. The daemon holds the file lock 
for the duration of its execution and deletes the file just before 
terminating. If another instance of the daemon is started, it will fail 
to obtain a write lock on the file. Consequently, it will realize that 
another instance of the daemon must already be running, and terminate.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Many
 network servers use an alternative convention of assuming that a server
 instance is already running if the well-known socket port to which the 
server binds is already in use (Section 61.10).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <tt>/var/run</tt>
 directory is the usual location for such lock files. Alternatively, the
 location of the file may be specified by a line in the daemon’s 
configuration file.</p><p class="docText">Conventionally, a daemon writes its own process ID into the lock file, and hence the file is often named with an extension <tt>.pid</tt> (for example, <span class="docEmphasis">syslogd</span> creates the file <tt>/var/run/syslogd.pid</tt>).
 This is useful if some application needs to find the process ID of the 
daemon. It also allows an extra sanity check—we can verify whether that 
process ID exists using <span class="docEmphasis">kill(pid, 0)</span>,
 as described in Section 20.5. (In older UNIX implementations that did 
not provide file locking, this was used as an imperfect, but usually 
practicable, way of assessing whether an instance of the daemon really 
was still running, or whether an earlier instance had simply failed to 
delete the file before terminating.)</p><p class="docText">There are many minor variations in the code used to create and lock a process ID lock file. Example 55-4 is based on ideas presented in [Stevens, 1999] and provides a function, <span class="docEmphasis">createPidFile()</span>, that encapsulates the steps described above. We would typically call this function with a line such as the following:</p><pre>if (createPidFile("mydaemon", "/var/run/mydaemon.pid", 0) == -1)
    errExit("createPidFile");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">One subtlety in the <span class="docEmphasis">createPidFile()</span> function is the use of <span class="docEmphasis">ftruncate()</span>
 to erase any previous string in the lock file. This is done because the
 last instance of the daemon may have failed to delete the file, perhaps
 because of a system crash. In this case, if the process ID of the new 
daemon instance is small, we might otherwise not completely overwrite 
the previous contents of the file. For example, if our process ID is 
789, then we would write just <tt>789\n</tt> to the file, but a previous daemon instance might have written <tt>12345\n</tt>. If we did not truncate the file, then the resulting content would be <tt>789\n5\n</tt>. Erasing any existing string may not be strictly necessary, but it is tidier and removes any potential for confusion.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> argument can specify the constant <tt>CPF_CLOEXEC</tt>, which causes <span class="docEmphasis">createPidFile()</span> to set the close-on-exec flag (Section 27.4) for the file descriptor. This is useful for servers that restart themselves by calling <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>. If the file descriptor was not closed during the <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, then the restarted server would think that a duplicate instance of the server is already running.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EWBFM">Example 55-4. Creating a PID lock file to ensure just one instance of a program is started</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>filelock/create_pid_file.c</b>
#include &lt;sys/stat.h&gt;
#include &lt;fcntl.h&gt;
#include "region_locking.h"             /* For lockRegion() */
#include "create_pid_file.h"            /* Declares createPidFile() and
                                           defines CPF_CLOEXEC */
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

#define BUF_SIZE 100            /* Large enough to hold maximum PID as string */

/* Open/create the file named in 'pidFile', lock it, optionally set the
   close-on-exec flag for the file descriptor, write our PID into the file,
   and (in case the caller is interested) return the file descriptor
   referring to the locked file. The caller is responsible for deleting
   'pidFile' file (just) before process termination. 'progName' should be the
   name of the calling program (i.e., argv[0] or similar), and is used only for
   diagnostic messages. If we can't open 'pidFile', or we encounter some other
   error, then we print an appropriate diagnostic and terminate. */

int
createPidFile(const char *progName, const char *pidFile, int flags)
{
    int fd;
    char buf[BUF_SIZE];

    fd = open(pidFile, O_RDWR | O_CREAT, S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR);
    if (fd == -1)
        errExit("Could not open PID file %s", pidFile);

    if (flags &amp; CPF_CLOEXEC) {

        /* Set the close-on-exec file descriptor flag */

        flags = fcntl(fd, F_GETFD);                     /* Fetch flags */
        if (flags == -1)
            errExit("Could not get flags for PID file %s", pidFile);

        flags |= FD_CLOEXEC;                            /* Turn on FD_CLOEXEC */

        if (fcntl(fd, F_SETFD, flags) == -1)            /* Update flags */
            errExit("Could not set flags for PID file %s", pidFile);
    }

    if (lockRegion(fd, F_WRLCK, SEEK_SET, 0, 0) == -1) {
        if (errno  == EAGAIN || errno == EACCES)
            fatal("PID file '%s' is locked; probably "
                     "'%s' is already running", pidFile, progName);
        else
            errExit("Unable to lock PID file '%s'", pidFile);
    }

    if (ftruncate(fd, 0) == -1)
        errExit("Could not truncate PID file '%s'", pidFile);

    snprintf(buf, BUF_SIZE, "%ld\n", (long) getpid());
    if (write(fd, buf, strlen(buf)) != strlen(buf))
        fatal("Writing to PID file '%s'", pidFile);

    return fd;
}
    <b>filelock/create_pid_file.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
