<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>55.7. Older Locking Techniques</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">55.7. Older Locking Techniques</h3><p class="docText">In older UNIX implementations that lacked file locking, a number of <span class="docEmphasis">ad hoc</span> locking techniques were employed. Although all of these have been superseded by <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>
 record locking, we describe them here since they still appear in some 
older programs. All of these techniques are advisory in nature.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EF6EM">55.7.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EJ6EM">55.7.1.1. <tt>open(file, O_CREAT | O_EXCL,...)</tt> <span class="docEmphStrong">plus</span> <tt>unlink(file)</tt></h5><p class="docText">SUSv3 requires that an <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> call with the flags <tt>O_CREAT</tt> and <tt>O_EXCL</tt> perform the steps of checking for the existence of a file and creating it atomically (Section 5.1).
 This means that if two processes attempt to create a file specifying 
these flags, it is guaranteed that only one of them will succeed. (The 
other process will receive the error <tt>EEXIST</tt> from <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>.) Used in conjunction with the <span class="docEmphasis">unlink()</span>
 system call, this provides the basis for a locking mechanism. Acquiring
 the lock is performed by successfully opening the file with the <tt>O_CREAT</tt> and <tt>O_EXCL</tt> flags, followed by an immediate <span class="docEmphasis">close()</span>. Releasing the lock is performed using <span class="docEmphasis">unlink()</span>. Although workable, this technique has several limitations:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">If the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> fails, indicating that some other process has the lock, then we must retry the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>
 in some kind of loop, either polling continuously (which wastes CPU 
time) or with a delay between each attempt (which means that there may 
be some delay between the time the lock becomes available and when we 
actually acquire it). With <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>, we can use <tt>F_SETLKW</tt> to block until the lock becomes free.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Acquiring and releasing locks using <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">unlink()</span>
 involves file-system operations that are rather slower than the use of 
record locks. (On one of the author’s x86-32 systems running Linux 
2.6.31, acquiring and releasing 1 million locks on an <span class="docEmphasis">ext3</span>
 file using the technique described here required 44 seconds. Acquiring 
and releasing 1 million record locks on the same byte of a file required
 2.5 seconds.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">If a process accidentally exits without deleting the lock file, the lock is not released. There are <span class="docEmphasis">ad hoc</span>
 techniques for handling this problem, including checking the last 
modification time of the file and having the lock holder write its 
process ID to the file so that we can check if the process still exists,
 but none of these techniques is foolproof. By comparison, record locks 
are released automatically when a process terminates.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If
 we are placing multiple locks (i.e., using multiple lock files), 
deadlocks are not detected. If a deadlock arises, the processes involved
 in the deadlock will remain blocked indefinitely. (Each process will be
 spinning, checking to see if it can obtain the lock it requires.) By 
contrast, the kernel provides deadlock detection for <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> record locks.</p></li><li><p class="docList">NFS version 2 doesn’t support <tt>O_EXCL</tt> semantics. Linux 2.4 NFS clients also fail to implement <tt>O_EXCL</tt> correctly, even for NFS version 3 and later.</p></li></ul><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EICFM">55.7.1.2. <tt>link(file, lockfile)</tt> <span class="docEmphStrong">plus</span> <tt>unlink(lockfile)</tt></h5><p class="docText">The fact that the <span class="docEmphasis">link()</span> system call fails if the new link already exists has also been used as a locking mechanism, again employing <span class="docEmphasis">unlink()</span>
 to perform the unlock function. The usual approach is to have each 
process that needs to acquire the lock create a unique temporary 
filename, typically one including the process ID (and possibly the 
hostname, if the lock file is created on a network file system). To 
acquire the lock, this temporary file is linked to some agreed-upon 
standard pathname. (The semantics of hard links require that the two 
pathnames reside in the same file system.) If the <span class="docEmphasis">link()</span> call succeeds, we have obtained the lock. If it fails (<tt>EEXIST</tt>), then another process has the lock and we must try again later. This technique suffers the same limitations as the <span class="docEmphasis">open(file</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">O_CREAT</span> | <span class="docEmphasis">O_EXCL</span>,...) technique described above.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EYDFM">55.7.1.3. <tt>open(file, O_CREAT | O_TRUNC | O_WRONLY, 0)</tt> plus <tt>unlink(file)</tt></h5><p class="docText">The fact that calling <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> on an existing file fails if <tt>O_TRUNC</tt>
 is specified and write permission is denied on the file can be used as 
the basis of a locking technique. To obtain a lock, we use the following
 code (which omits error checking) to create a new file:</p><pre>fd = open(file, O_CREAT | O_TRUNC | O_WRONLY, (mode_t) 0);
close(fd);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">For an explanation of why we use the <span class="docEmphasis">(mode_t)</span> cast in the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> call above, see Appendix C.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> call succeeds (i.e., the file didn’t previously exist), we have the lock. If it fails with <tt>EACCES</tt>
 (i.e., the file exists and has no permissions for anyone), then another
 process has the lock, and we must try again later. This technique 
suffers the same limitations as the previous techniques, with the added 
caveat that we can’t employ it in a program with superuser privileges, 
since the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> call will always succeed, regardless of the permissions that are set on the file.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
