<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>55.8. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">55.8. Summary</h3><p class="docText">File locks allow processes to synchronize access to a file. Linux provides two file locking system calls: the BSD-derived <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> and the System V-derived <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>. Although both system calls are available on most UNIX implementations, only <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> locking is standardized in SUSv3.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span>
 system call locks an entire file. Two types of locks may be placed: 
shared locks, which are compatible with shared locks held by other 
processes, and exclusive locks, which prevent other processes from 
placing any type of lock.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>
 system call places locks (“record locks”) on any region of a file, 
ranging from a single byte to the entire file. Two types of locks may be
 placed: read locks and write locks, which have similar compatibility 
semantics to the shared and exclusive locks placed via <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span>. If a blocking (<tt>F_SETLKW</tt>) lock request would bring about a deadlock situation, then the kernel causes <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> to fail (with the error <tt>EDEADLK</tt>) in one of the affected processes.</p><p class="docText">Locks placed using <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> are invisible to one another (except on systems that implement <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> using <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>). The locks placed via <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> have different semantics with respect to inheritance across <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> and release when file descriptors are closed.</p><p class="docText">The Linux-specific <tt>/proc/locks</tt> file displays the file locks currently held by all processes on the system.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ELBFM">55.8.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EPBFM">55.8.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">An extensive discussion of <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> record locking can be found in [Stevens &amp; Rago, 2005] and [Stevens, 1999]. Some details of the implementation of <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>
 locking on Linux are provided in [Bovet &amp; Cesati, 2005]. 
[Tanenbaum, 2007] and [Deitel et al., 2004] describe deadlocking 
concepts in general, including coverage of deadlock detection, 
avoidance, and prevention.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
