<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>55.9. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">55.9. Exercises</h3><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Experiment by running multiple instances of the program in Example 55-1 (<tt>t_flock.c</tt>) to determine the following points about the operation of <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span>:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Can a series of processes acquiring shared locks on a file starve a process attempting to place an exclusive lock on the file?</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Suppose
 that a file is locked exclusively, and other processes are waiting to 
place both shared and exclusive locks on the file. When the first lock 
is released, are there any rules determining which process is next 
granted a lock? For example, do shared locks have priority over 
exclusive locks or vice versa? Are locks granted in FIFO order?</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If you have access to some other UNIX implementation that provides <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span>, try to determine the rules on that implementation.</p></div></li></ol></div></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write a program to determine whether <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> detects deadlock situations when being used to lock two different files in two processes.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write a program to verify the statements made in Section 55.2.1 regarding the semantics of inheritance and release of <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> locks.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Experiment by running the programs in Example 55-1 (<tt>t_flock.c</tt>) and Example 55-2 (<tt>i_fcntl_locking.c</tt>) to see whether locks granted by <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>
 have any effect on one another. If you have access to other UNIX 
implementations, try the same experiment on those implementations.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">In Section 55.3.4,
 we noted that, on Linux, the time required to add or check for the 
existence of a lock is a function of the position of the lock in the 
list of all locks on the file. Write two programs to verify this:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The
 first program should acquire (say) 40,001 write locks on a file. These 
locks are placed on alternating bytes of the file; that is, locks are 
placed on bytes 0, 2, 4, 6, and so on through to (say) byte 80,000. 
Having acquired these locks, the process then goes to sleep.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">While the first program is sleeping, the second program loops (say) 10,000 times, using <tt>F_SETLK</tt>
 to try to lock one of the bytes locked by the previous program (these 
lock attempts always fail). In any particular execution, the program 
always tries to lock byte <span class="docEmphasis">N * 2</span> of the file.</p></div></li></ol></div><p class="docList">Using the shell built-in <span class="docEmphasis">time</span> command, measure the time required by the second program for <span class="docEmphasis">N</span> equals 0, 10,000, 20,000, 30,000, and 40,000. Do the results match the expected linear behavior?</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Experiment with the program in Example 55-2 (<tt>i_fcntl_locking.c</tt>) to verify the statements made in Section 55.3.6 regarding lock starvation and priority for <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> record locks.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If you have access to other UNIX implementations, use the program in Example 55-2 (<tt>i_fcntl_locking.c</tt>) to see if you can establish any rules for <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> record locking regarding starvation of writers and regarding the order in which multiple queued lock requests are granted.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Use the program in Example 55-2 (<tt>i_fcntl_locking.c</tt>) to demonstrate that the kernel detects circular deadlocks involving three (or more) processes locking the same file.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write
 a pair of programs (or a single program that uses a child process) to 
bring about the deadlock situation with mandatory locks described in 
Section 55.4.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Read the manual page of the <span class="docEmphasis">lockfile(1)</span> utility that is supplied with <span class="docEmphasis">procmail</span>. Write a simple version of this program.</p></div></li></ol></div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
