<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 56. Sockets: Introduction</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0EUBFM">Chapter 56. Sockets: Introduction</h2><p class="docText">Sockets
 are a method of IPC that allow data to be exchanged between 
applications, either on the same host (computer) or on different hosts 
connected by a network. The first widespread implementation of the 
sockets API appeared with 4.2BSD in 1983, and this API has been ported 
to virtually every UNIX implementation, as well as most other operating 
systems.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The
 sockets API is formally specified in POSIX.1g, which was ratified in 
2000 after spending about a decade as a draft standard. This standard 
has been superseded by SUSv3.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">This chapter and the following chapters describe the use of sockets, as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">This
 chapter provides a general introduction to the sockets API. The 
following chapters assume an understanding of the general concepts 
presented here. We don’t present any example code in this chapter. Code 
examples in the UNIX and Internet domains are presented in the following
 chapters.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Chapter 57 describes UNIX domain sockets, which allow communication between applications on the same host system.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Chapter 58
 introduces various computer networking concepts and describes key 
features of the TCP/IP networking protocols. It provides background 
needed for the next chapters.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Chapter 59 describes Internet domain sockets, which allow applications on different hosts to communicate via a TCP/IP network.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Chapter 60 discusses the design of servers that use sockets.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Chapter 61
 covers a range of advanced topics, including additional features for 
socket I/O, a more detailed look at the TCP protocol, and the use of 
socket options to retrieve and modify various attributes of sockets.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">These
 chapters merely aim to give the reader a good grounding in the use of 
sockets. Sockets programming, especially for network communication, is 
an enormous topic in its own right, and forms the subject of entire 
books. Sources of further information are listed in Section 59.15.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
