<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>56.1. Overview</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">56.1. Overview</h3><p class="docText">In a typical client-server scenario, applications communicate using sockets as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Each application creates a socket. A socket is the “apparatus” that allows communication, and both applications require one.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The server binds its socket to a well-known address (name) so that clients can locate it.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">A socket is created using the <span class="docEmphasis">socket()</span> system call, which returns a file descriptor used to refer to the socket in subsequent system calls:</p><pre>fd = socket(domain, type, protocol);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We describe socket domains and types in the following paragraphs. For all applications described in this book, <span class="docEmphasis">protocol</span> is always specified as 0.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESEFM">56.1.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EWEFM">56.1.1.1. Communication domains</h5><p class="docText">Sockets exist in a <span class="docEmphasis">communication domain</span>, which determines:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">the method of identifying a socket (i.e., the format of a socket “address”); and</p></li><li><p class="docList">the
 range of communication (i.e., either between applications on the same 
host or between applications on different hosts connected via a 
network).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Modern operating systems support at least the following domains:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">UNIX</span> (<tt>AF_UNIX</tt>) domain allows communication between applications on the same host. (POSIX.1g used the name <tt>AF_LOCAL</tt> as a synonym for <tt>AF_UNIX</tt>, but this name is not used in SUSv3.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">IPv4</span> (<tt>AF_INET</tt>) domain allows communication between applications running on hosts connected via an Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) network.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">IPv6</span> (<tt>AF_INET6</tt>)
 domain allows communication between applications running on hosts 
connected via an Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) network. Although 
IPv6 is designed as the successor to IPv4, the latter protocol is 
currently still the most widely used.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Table 56-1 summarizes the characteristics of these socket domains.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In some code, we may see constants with names such as <tt>PF_UNIX</tt> instead of <tt>AF_UNIX</tt>. In this context, <tt>AF</tt> stands for “address family” and <tt>PF</tt>
 stands for “protocol family.” Initially, it was conceived that a single
 protocol family might support multiple address families. In practice, 
no protocol family supporting multiple address families has ever been 
defined, and all existing implementations define the <tt>PF_</tt> constants to be synonymous with the corresponding <tt>AF_</tt> constants. (SUSv3 specifies the <tt>AF_</tt> constants, but not the <tt>PF_</tt> constants.) In this book, we always use the <tt>AF_</tt> constants. Further information about the history of these constants can be found in Section 4.2 of [Stevens et al., 2004].</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 56-1. Socket domains</h5></caption><colgroup span="5"><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Domain</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Communication performed</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Communication between applications</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Address format</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Address structure</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>AF_UNIX</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">within kernel</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">on same host</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">pathname</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">sockaddr_un</span></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>AF_INET</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">via IPv4</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">on hosts connected via an IPv4 network</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">32-bit IPv4 address + 16-bit port number</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">sockaddr_in</span></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>AF_INET6</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">via IPv6</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">on hosts connected via an IPv6 network</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">128-bit IPv6 address + 16-bit port number</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">sockaddr_in6</span></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EBLFM">56.1.1.2. Socket types</h5><p class="docText">Every
 sockets implementation provides at least two types of sockets: stream 
and datagram. These socket types are supported in both the UNIX and the 
Internet domains. Table 56-2 summarizes the properties of these socket types.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 56-2. Socket types and their properties</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" rowspan="2" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom">Property</th><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" colspan="2" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom">Socket type</th></tr><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Stream</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Datagram</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Reliable delivery?</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Y</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">N</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Message boundaries preserved?</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">N</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Y</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Connection-oriented?</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Y</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">N</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Stream sockets</span> (<tt>SOCK_STREAM</tt>) provide a reliable, bidirectional, byte-stream communication channel. By the terms in this description, we mean the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Reliable</span>
 means that we are guaranteed that either the transmitted data will 
arrive intact at the receiving application, exactly as it was 
transmitted by the sender (assuming that neither the network link nor 
the receiver crashes), or that we’ll receive notification of a probable 
failure in transmission.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Bidirectional</span> means that data may be transmitted in either direction between two sockets.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Byte-stream</span> means that, as with pipes, there is no concept of message boundaries (refer to Section 44.1).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">A
 stream socket is similar to using a pair of pipes to allow 
bidirectional communication between two applications, with the 
difference that (Internet domain) sockets permit communication over a 
network.</p><p class="docText">Stream sockets operate in connected pairs. For this reason, stream sockets are described as <span class="docEmphasis">connection-oriented</span>. The term <span class="docEmphasis">peer socket</span> refers to the socket at the other end of a connection; <span class="docEmphasis">peer address</span> denotes the address of that socket; and <span class="docEmphasis">peer application</span> denotes the application utilizing the peer socket. Sometimes, the term <span class="docEmphasis">remote</span> (or <span class="docEmphasis">foreign</span>) is used synonymously with <span class="docEmphasis">peer</span>. Analogously, sometimes the term <span class="docEmphasis">local</span>
 is used to refer to the application, socket, or address for this end of
 the connection. A stream socket can be connected to only one peer.</p><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Datagram sockets</span> (<tt>SOCK_DGRAM</tt>) allow data to be exchanged in the form of messages called <span class="docEmphasis">datagrams</span>.
 With datagram sockets, message boundaries are preserved, but data 
transmission is not reliable. Messages may arrive out of order, be 
duplicated, or not arrive at all.</p><p class="docText">Datagram sockets are an example of the more generic concept of a <span class="docEmphasis">connectionless</span> socket. Unlike a stream socket, a datagram socket doesn’t need to be connected to another socket in order to be used. (In Section 56.6.2,
 we’ll see that datagram sockets may be connected with one another, but 
this has somewhat different semantics from connected stream sockets.)</p><p class="docText">In
 the Internet domain, datagram sockets employ the User Datagram Protocol
 (UDP), and stream sockets (usually) employ the Transmission Control 
Protocol (TCP). Instead of using the terms <span class="docEmphasis">Internet domain datagram socket</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">Internet domain stream socket</span>, we’ll often just use the terms <span class="docEmphasis">UDP socket</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">TCP socket</span>, respectively.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EZSFM">56.1.1.3. Socket system calls</h5><p class="docText">The key socket system calls are the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">socket()</span> system call creates a new socket.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">bind()</span>
 system call binds a socket to an address. Usually, a server employs 
this call to bind its socket to a well-known address so that clients can
 locate the socket.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">listen()</span> system call allows a stream socket to accept incoming connections from other sockets.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span>
 system call accepts a connection from a peer application on a listening
 stream socket, and optionally returns the address of the peer socket.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">connect()</span> system call establishes a connection with another socket.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On
 most Linux architectures (the exceptions include Alpha and IA-64), all 
of the sockets system calls are actually implemented as library 
functions multiplexed through a single system call, <span class="docEmphasis">socketcall()</span>.
 (This is an artifact of the original development of the Linux sockets 
implementation as a separate project.) Nevertheless, we refer to all of 
these functions as system calls in this book, since this is what they 
were in the original BSD implementation, as well as in many other 
contemporary UNIX implementations.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Socket I/O can be performed using the conventional <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> system calls, or using a range of socket-specific system calls (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">send()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">recv()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">sendto()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">recvfrom()</span>).
 By default, these system calls block if the I/O operation can’t be 
completed immediately. Nonblocking I/O is also possible, by using the <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> <tt>F_SETFL</tt> operation (Section 5.3) to enable the <tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt> open file status flag.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On Linux, we can call <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl(fd, FIONREAD, &amp;cnt)</span> to obtain the number of unread bytes available on the stream socket referred to by the file descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>.
 For a datagram socket, this operation returns the number of bytes in 
the next unread datagram (which may be zero if the next datagram is of 
zero length), or zero if there are no pending datagrams. This feature is
 not specified in SUSv3.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
