<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>56.2. Creating a Socket: socket()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">56.2. Creating a Socket: <span class="docEmphasis">socket()</span></h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">socket()</span> system call creates a new socket.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/socket.h&gt;

int <b>socket</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">domain</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">type</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">protocol</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns file descriptor on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">domain</span> argument specifies the communication domain for the socket. The <span class="docEmphasis">type</span> argument specifies the socket type. This argument is usually specified as either <tt>SOCK_STREAM</tt>, to create a stream socket, or <tt>SOCK_DGRAM</tt>, to create a datagram socket.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">protocol</span> argument is always specified as 0 for the socket types we describe in this book. Nonzero <span class="docEmphasis">protocol</span> values are used with some socket types that we don’t describe. For example, <span class="docEmphasis">protocol</span> is specified as <tt>IPPROTO_RAW</tt> for raw sockets (<tt>SOCK_RAW</tt>).</p><p class="docText">On success, <span class="docEmphasis">socket()</span> returns a file descriptor used to refer to the newly created socket in later system calls.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Starting with kernel 2.6.27, Linux provides a second use for the <span class="docEmphasis">type</span> argument, by allowing two nonstandard flags to be ORed with the socket type. The <tt>SOCK_CLOEXEC</tt> flag causes the kernel to enable the close-on-exec flag (<tt>FD_CLOEXEC</tt>) for the new file descriptor. This flag is useful for the same reasons as the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> <tt>O_CLOEXEC</tt> flag described in Section 4.3.1. The SOCK_NONBLOCK flag causes the kernel to set the <tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt>
 flag on the underlying open file description, so that future I/O 
operations on the socket will be nonblocking. This saves additional 
calls to <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> to achieve the same result.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
