<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>56.3. Binding a Socket to an Address: bind()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">56.3. Binding a Socket to an Address: <span class="docEmphasis">bind()</span></h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">bind()</span> system call binds a socket to an address.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/socket.h&gt;

int <b>bind</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">sockfd</span>, const struct sockaddr <span class="docEmphasis">*addr</span>, socklen_t <span class="docEmphasis">addrlen</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sockfd</span> argument is a file descriptor obtained from a previous call to <span class="docEmphasis">socket()</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span>
 argument is a pointer to a structure specifying the address to which 
this socket is to be bound. The type of structure passed in this 
argument depends on the socket domain. The <span class="docEmphasis">addrlen</span> argument specifies the size of the address structure. The <span class="docEmphasis">socklen_t</span> data type used for the <span class="docEmphasis">addrlen</span> argument is an integer type specified by SUSv3.</p><p class="docText">Typically,
 we bind a server’s socket to a well-known address—that is, a fixed 
address that is known in advance to client applications that need to 
communicate with that server.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">There
 are other possibilities than binding a server’s socket to a well-known 
address. For example, for an Internet domain socket, the server could 
omit the call to <span class="docEmphasis">bind()</span> and simply call <span class="docEmphasis">listen()</span>, which causes the kernel to choose an ephemeral port for that socket. (We describe ephemeral ports in Section 58.6.1.) Afterward, the server can use <span class="docEmphasis">getsockname()</span> (Section 61.5)
 to retrieve the address of its socket. In this scenario, the server 
must then publish that address so that clients know how to locate the 
server’s socket. Such publication could be done by registering the 
server’s address with a centralized directory service application that 
clients then contact in order to obtain the address. (For example, Sun 
RPC solves this problem using its <span class="docEmphasis">portmapper</span> server.) Of course, the directory service application’s socket must reside at a well-known address.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
