<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>56.4. Generic Socket Address Structures: struct sockaddr</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">56.4. Generic Socket Address Structures: <span class="docEmphasis">struct sockaddr</span></h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">addrlen</span> arguments to <span class="docEmphasis">bind()</span> require some further explanation. Looking at Table 56-1,
 we see that each socket domain uses a different address format. For 
example, UNIX domain sockets use pathnames, while Internet domain 
sockets use the combination of an IP address plus a port number. For 
each socket domain, a different structure type is defined to store a 
socket address. However, because system calls such as <span class="docEmphasis">bind()</span>
 are generic to all socket domains, they must be able to accept address 
structures of any type. In order to permit this, the sockets API defines
 a generic address structure, <span class="docEmphasis">struct sockaddr</span>.
 The only purpose for this type is to cast the various domain-specific 
address structures to a single type for use as arguments in the socket 
system calls. The <span class="docEmphasis">sockaddr</span> structure is typically defined as follows:</p><pre>struct sockaddr {
    sa_family_t sa_family;          /* Address family (AF_* constant) */
    char        sa_data[14];        /* Socket address (size varies
                                       according to socket domain) */
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This structure serves as a 
template for all of the domain-specific address structures. Each of 
these address structures begins with a <span class="docEmphasis">family</span> field corresponding to the <span class="docEmphasis">sa_family</span> field of the <span class="docEmphasis">sockaddr</span> structure. (The <span class="docEmphasis">sa_family_t</span> data type is an integer type specified in SUSv3.) The value in the <span class="docEmphasis">family</span> field is sufficient to determine the size and format of the address stored in the remainder of the structure.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Some UNIX implementations also define an additional field in the <span class="docEmphasis">sockaddr</span> structure, <span class="docEmphasis">sa_len</span>,
 that specifies the total size of the structure. SUSv3 doesn’t require 
this field, and it is not present in the Linux implementation of the 
sockets API.</p><p class="docText">If we define the <tt>_GNU_SOURCE</tt> feature test macro, then <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> prototypes the various socket system calls in <tt>&lt;sys/socket.h&gt;</tt> using a <span class="docEmphasis">gcc</span> extension that eliminates the need for the <span class="docEmphasis">(struct sockaddr *)</span> cast. However, reliance on this feature is nonportable (it will result in compilation warnings on other systems).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
