<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>56.7. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">56.7. Summary</h3><p class="docText">Sockets allow communication between applications on the same host or on different hosts connected via a network.</p><p class="docText">A
 socket exists within a communication domain, which determines the range
 of communication and the address format used to identify the socket. 
SUSv3 specifies the UNIX (<tt>AF_UNIX</tt>), IPv4 (<tt>AF_INET</tt>), and IPv6 (<tt>AF_INET6</tt>) communication domains.</p><p class="docText">Most applications use one of two socket types: stream or datagram. Stream sockets (<tt>SOCK_STREAM</tt>) provide a reliable, bidirectional, byte-stream communication channel between two endpoints. Datagram sockets (<tt>SOCK_DGRAM</tt>) provide unreliable, connectionless, message-oriented communication.</p><p class="docText">A typical stream socket server creates its socket using <span class="docEmphasis">socket()</span>, and then binds the socket to a well-known address using <span class="docEmphasis">bind()</span>. The server then calls <span class="docEmphasis">listen()</span> to allow connections to be received on the socket. Each client connection is then accepted on the listening socket using <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span>,
 which returns a file descriptor for a new socket that is connected to 
the client’s socket. A typical stream socket client creates a socket 
using <span class="docEmphasis">socket()</span>, and then establishes a connection by calling <span class="docEmphasis">connect()</span>,
 specifying the server’s well-known address. After two stream sockets 
are connected, data can be transferred in either direction using <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>. Once all processes with a file descriptor referring to a stream socket endpoint have performed an implicit or explicit <span class="docEmphasis">close()</span>, the connection is terminated.</p><p class="docText">A typical datagram socket server creates a socket using <span class="docEmphasis">socket()</span>, and then binds it to a well-known address using <span class="docEmphasis">bind()</span>.
 Because datagram sockets are connectionless, the server’s socket can be
 used to receive datagrams from any client. Datagrams can be received 
using <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> or using the socket-specific <span class="docEmphasis">recvfrom()</span> system call, which returns the address of the sending socket. A datagram socket client creates a socket using <span class="docEmphasis">socket()</span>, and then uses <span class="docEmphasis">sendto()</span> to send a datagram to a specified (i.e., the server’s) address. The <span class="docEmphasis">connect()</span>
 system call can be used with a datagram socket to set a peer address 
for the socket. After doing this, it is no longer necessary to specify 
the destination address for outgoing datagrams; a <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> call can be used to send a datagram.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETLFM">56.7.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EXLFM">56.7.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">Refer to the sources of further information listed in Section 59.15.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
