<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>57.1. UNIX Domain Socket Addresses: struct sockaddr_un</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">57.1. UNIX Domain Socket Addresses: <span class="docEmphasis">struct sockaddr_un</span></h3><p class="docText">In
 the UNIX domain, a socket address takes the form of a pathname, and the
 domain-specific socket address structure is defined as follows:</p><pre>struct sockaddr_un {
    sa_family_t sun_family;         /* Always AF_UNIX */
    char sun_path[108];             /* Null-terminated socket pathname */
};</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The prefix <span class="docEmphasis">sun_</span> in the fields of the <span class="docEmphasis">sockaddr_un</span> structure has nothing to do with Sun Microsystems; rather, it derives from <span class="docEmphasis">socket unix</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">SUSv3 doesn’t specify the size of the <span class="docEmphasis">sun_path</span>
 field. Early BSD implementations used 108 and 104 bytes, and one 
contemporary implementation (HP-UX 11) uses 92 bytes. Portable 
applications should code to this lower value, and use <span class="docEmphasis">snprintf()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">strncpy()</span> to avoid buffer overruns when writing into this field.</p><p class="docText">In order to bind a UNIX domain socket to an address, we initialize a <span class="docEmphasis">sockaddr_un</span> structure, and then pass a (cast) pointer to this structure as the <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span> argument to <span class="docEmphasis">bind()</span>, and specify <span class="docEmphasis">addrlen</span> as the size of the structure, as shown in Example 57-1.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EBOFM">Example 57-1. Binding a UNIX domain socket</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedWidth">const char *SOCKNAME = "/tmp/mysock";
    int sfd;
    struct sockaddr_un addr;

    sfd = socket(AF_UNIX, SOCK_STREAM, 0);            /* Create socket */
    if (sfd == -1)
        errExit("socket");

    memset(&amp;addr, 0, sizeof(struct sockaddr_un));     /* Clear structure */
    addr.sun_family = AF_UNIX;                            /* UNIX domain address */
    strncpy(addr.sun_path, SOCKNAME, sizeof(addr.sun_path) - 1);

    if (bind(sfd, (struct sockaddr *) &amp;addr, sizeof(struct sockaddr_un)) == -1)
        errExit("bind");

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">The use of the <span class="docEmphasis">memset()</span> call in Example 57-1 ensures that all of the structure fields have the value 0. (The subsequent <span class="docEmphasis">strncpy()</span> call takes advantage of this by specifying its final argument as one less than the size of the <span class="docEmphasis">sun_path</span> field, to ensure that this field always has a terminating null byte.) Using <span class="docEmphasis">memset()</span>
 to zero out the entire structure, rather than initializing individual 
fields, ensures that any nonstandard fields that are provided by some 
implementations are also initialized to 0.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The BSD-derived function <span class="docEmphasis">bzero()</span> is an alternative to <span class="docEmphasis">memset()</span> for zeroing the contents of a structure. SUSv3 specifies <span class="docEmphasis">bzero()</span> and the related <span class="docEmphasis">bcopy()</span> (which is similar to <span class="docEmphasis">memmove()</span>), but marks both functions LEGACY, noting that <span class="docEmphasis">memset()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">memmove()</span> are preferred. SUSv4 removes the specifications of <span class="docEmphasis">bzero()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">bcopy()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">When used to bind a UNIX domain socket, <span class="docEmphasis">bind()</span>
 creates an entry in the file system. (Thus, a directory specified as 
part of the socket pathname needs to be accessible and writable.) The 
ownership of the file is determined according to the usual rules for 
file creation (Section 15.3.1). The file is marked as a socket. When <span class="docEmphasis">stat()</span> is applied to this pathname, it returns the value <tt>S_IFSOCK</tt> in the file-type component of the <span class="docEmphasis">st_mode</span> field of the <span class="docEmphasis">stat</span> structure (Section 15.1). When listed with <span class="docEmphasis">ls -l</span>, a UNIX domain socket is shown with the type <span class="docEmphasis">s</span> in the first column, and <span class="docEmphasis">ls -F</span> appends an equal sign (=) to the socket pathname.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Although
 UNIX domain sockets are identified by pathnames, I/O on these sockets 
doesn’t involve operations on the underlying device.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The following points are worth noting about binding a UNIX domain socket:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">We can’t bind a socket to an existing pathname (<span class="docEmphasis">bind()</span> fails with the error <tt>EADDRINUSE</tt>).</p></li><li><p class="docList">It
 is usual to bind a socket to an absolute pathname, so that the socket 
resides at a fixed address in the file system. Using a relative pathname
 is possible, but unusual, because it requires an application that wants
 to <span class="docEmphasis">connect()</span> to this socket to know the current working directory of the application that performs the <span class="docEmphasis">bind()</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A socket may be bound to only one pathname; conversely, a pathname can be bound to only one socket.</p></li><li><p class="docList">We can’t use <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> to open a socket.</p></li><li><p class="docList">When the socket is no longer required, its pathname entry can (and generally should) be removed using <span class="docEmphasis">unlink()</span> (or <span class="docEmphasis">remove()</span>).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">In most of our example programs, we bind UNIX domain sockets to pathnames in the <tt>/tmp</tt>
 directory, because this directory is normally present and writable on 
every system. This makes it easy for the reader to run these programs 
without needing to first edit the socket pathnames. Be aware, however, 
that this is generally not a good design technique. As pointed out in Section 38.7, creating files in publicly writable directories such as <tt>/tmp</tt> can lead to various security vulnerabilities. For example, by creating a pathname in <tt>/tmp</tt>
 with the same name as that used by the application socket, we can 
create a simple denial-of-service attack. Real-world applications should
 <span class="docEmphasis">bind()</span> UNIX domain sockets to absolute pathnames in suitably secured directories.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
