<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>57.2. Stream Sockets in the UNIX Domain</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">57.2. Stream Sockets in the UNIX Domain</h3><p class="docText">We now present a simple client-server application that uses stream sockets in the UNIX domain. The client program (Example 57-4) connects to the server, and uses the connection to transfer data from its standard input to the server. The server program (Example 57-3)
 accepts client connections, and transfers all data sent on the 
connection by the client to standard output. The server is a simple 
example of an <span class="docEmphasis">iterative</span>
 server—a server that handles one client at a time before proceeding to 
the next client. (We consider server design in more detail in Chapter 60.)</p><p class="docText">Example 57-2 is the header file used by both of these programs.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E5PFM">Example 57-2. Header file for <tt>us_xfr_sv.c</tt> and <tt>us_xfr_cl.c</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre><b>sockets/us_xfr.h</b>
#include &lt;sys/un.h&gt;
#include &lt;sys/socket.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

#define SV_SOCK_PATH "/tmp/us_xfr"

#define BUF_SIZE 100
      <b>sockets/us_xfr.h</b></pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">In
 the following pages, we first present the source code of the server and
 client, and then discuss the details of these programs and show an 
example of their use.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EQQFM">Example 57-3. A simple UNIX domain stream socket server</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>sockets/us_xfr_sv.c</b>
#include "us_xfr.h"

#define BACKLOG 5

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    struct sockaddr_un addr;
    int sfd, cfd;
    ssize_t numRead;
    char buf[BUF_SIZE];

    sfd = socket(AF_UNIX, SOCK_STREAM, 0);
    if (sfd == -1)
        errExit("socket");

    /* Construct server socket address, bind socket to it,
       and make this a listening socket */

    if (remove(SV_SOCK_PATH) == -1 &amp;&amp; errno != ENOENT)
        errExit("remove-%s", SV_SOCK_PATH);

    memset(&amp;addr, 0, sizeof(struct sockaddr_un));
    addr.sun_family = AF_UNIX;
    strncpy(addr.sun_path, SV_SOCK_PATH, sizeof(addr.sun_path) - 1);

    if (bind(sfd, (struct sockaddr *) &amp;addr, sizeof(struct sockaddr_un)) == -1)
        errExit("bind");

    if (listen(sfd, BACKLOG) == -1)
        errExit("listen");

    for (;;) {          /* Handle client connections iteratively */

        /* Accept a connection. The connection is returned on a new
           socket, 'cfd'; the listening socket ('sfd') remains open
           and can be used to accept further connections. */

        cfd = accept(sfd, NULL, NULL);
        if (cfd == -1)
            errExit("accept");

        /* Transfer data from connected socket to stdout until EOF */

        while ((numRead = read(cfd, buf, BUF_SIZE)) &gt; 0)
            if (write(STDOUT_FILENO, buf, numRead) != numRead)
                fatal("partial/failed write");

        if (numRead == -1)
            errExit("read");
        if (close(cfd) == -1)
            errMsg("close");
    }
}
     <b>sockets/us_xfr_sv.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E2QFM">Example 57-4. A simple UNIX domain stream socket client</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>sockets/us_xfr_cl.c</b>
#include "us_xfr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    struct sockaddr_un addr;
    int sfd;
    ssize_t numRead;
    char buf[BUF_SIZE];

    sfd = socket(AF_UNIX, SOCK_STREAM, 0);       /* Create client socket */
    if (sfd == -1)
        errExit("socket");

    /* Construct server address, and make the connection */

    memset(&amp;addr, 0, sizeof(struct sockaddr_un));
    addr.sun_family = AF_UNIX;
    strncpy(addr.sun_path, SV_SOCK_PATH, sizeof(addr.sun_path) - 1);

    if (connect(sfd, (struct sockaddr *) &amp;addr,
                sizeof(struct sockaddr_un)) == -1)
        errExit("connect");

    /* Copy stdin to socket */

    while ((numRead = read(STDIN_FILENO, buf, BUF_SIZE)) &gt; 0)
        if (write(sfd, buf, numRead) != numRead)
            fatal("partial/failed write");

    if (numRead == -1)
        errExit("read");

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);         /* Closes our socket; server sees EOF */
}
     <b>sockets/us_xfr_cl.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">The server program is shown in Example 57-3. The server performs the following steps:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Create a socket.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Remove any existing file with the same pathname as that to which we want to bind the socket.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Construct
 an address structure for the server’s socket, bind the socket to that 
address, and mark the socket as a listening socket.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Execute an infinite loop to handle incoming client requests. Each loop iteration performs the following steps:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Accept a connection, obtaining a new socket, <span class="docEmphasis">cfd</span>, for the connection.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Read all of the data from the connected socket and write it to standard output.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Close the connected socket <span class="docEmphasis">cfd</span>.</p></li></ul></li></ul><p class="docText">The server must be terminated manually (e.g., by sending it a signal).</p><p class="docText">The client program (Example 57-4) performs the following steps:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Create a socket.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Construct the address structure for the server’s socket and connect to the socket at that address.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Execute
 a loop that copies its standard input to the socket connection. Upon 
encountering end-of-file in its standard input, the client terminates, 
with the result that its socket is closed and the server sees 
end-of-file when reading from the socket on the other end of the 
connection.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The following shell session log demonstrates the use of these programs. We begin by running the server in the background:</p><pre>$ <b>./us_xfr_sv &gt; b &amp; </b>
[1] 9866
$ <b>ls -lF /tmp/us_xfr </b>                        <i> Examine socket file with ls</i>
srwxr-xr-x    1 mtk      users         0 Jul 18 10:48 /tmp/us_xfr=</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We then create a test file to be used as input for the client, and run the client:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>cat *.c &gt; a </b>
$ <b>./us_xfr_cl &lt; a </b>                           <i> Client takes input from test file</i>

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">At this point, the child 
has completed. Now we terminate the server as well, and check that the 
server’s output matches the client’s input:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>kill %1 </b>                                   <i> Terminate server</i>
 [1]+  Terminated   ./us_xfr_sv &gt;b          <i> Shell sees server’s termination</i>
$ <b>diff a b </b>
$

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">diff</span> command produces no output, indicating that the input and output files are identical.</p><p class="docText">Note that after the server terminates, the socket pathname continues to exist. This is why the server uses <span class="docEmphasis">remove()</span> to remove any existing instance of the socket pathname before calling <span class="docEmphasis">bind()</span>. (Assuming we have appropriate permissions, this <span class="docEmphasis">remove()</span> call would remove any type of file with this pathname, even if it wasn’t a socket.) If we did not do this, then the <span class="docEmphasis">bind()</span> call would fail if a previous invocation of the server had already created this socket pathname.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
