<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>57.5. Creating a Connected Socket Pair: socketpair()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">57.5. Creating a Connected Socket Pair: <span class="docEmphasis">socketpair()</span></h3><p class="docText">Sometimes,
 it is useful for a single process to create a pair of sockets and 
connect them together. This could be done using two calls to <span class="docEmphasis">socket()</span>, a call to <span class="docEmphasis">bind()</span>, and then either calls to <span class="docEmphasis">listen()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">connect()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span> (for stream sockets), or a call to <span class="docEmphasis">connect()</span> (for datagram sockets). The <span class="docEmphasis">socketpair()</span> system call provides a shorthand for this operation.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/socket.h&gt;

int <b>socketpair</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">domain</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">type</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">protocol</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">sockfd</span>[2]);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">This <span class="docEmphasis">socketpair()</span> system call can be used only in the UNIX domain; that is, <span class="docEmphasis">domain</span> must be specified as <tt>AF_UNIX</tt>.
 (This restriction applies on most implementations, and is logical, 
since the socket pair is created on a single host system.) The socket <span class="docEmphasis">type</span> may be specified as either <tt>SOCK_DGRAM</tt> or <tt>SOCK_STREAM</tt>. The <span class="docEmphasis">protocol</span> argument must be specified as 0. The <span class="docEmphasis">sockfd</span> array returns the file descriptors referring to the two connected sockets.</p><p class="docText">Specifying <span class="docEmphasis">type</span> as <tt>SOCK_STREAM</tt> creates the equivalent of a bidirectional pipe (also known as a <span class="docEmphasis">stream pipe</span>).
 Each socket can be used for both reading and writing, and separate data
 channels flow in each direction between the two sockets. (On 
BSD-derived implementations, <span class="docEmphasis">pipe()</span> is implemented as a call to <span class="docEmphasis">socketpair()</span>.)</p><p class="docText">Typically, a socket pair is used in a similar fashion to a pipe. After the <span class="docEmphasis">socketpair()</span> call, the process then creates a child via <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>.
 The child inherits copies of the parent’s file descriptors, including 
the descriptors referring to the socket pair. Thus, the parent and child
 can use the socket pair for IPC.</p><p class="docText">One way in which the use of <span class="docEmphasis">socketpair()</span>
 differs from creating a pair of connected sockets manually is that the 
sockets are not bound to any address. This can help us avoid a whole 
class of security vulnerabilities, since the sockets are not visible to 
any other process.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Starting with kernel 2.6.27, Linux provides a second use for the <span class="docEmphasis">type</span> argument, by allowing two nonstandard flags to be ORed with the socket type. The <tt>SOCK_CLOEXEC</tt> flag causes the kernel to enable the close-on-exec flag (<tt>FD_CLOEXEC</tt>) for the two new file descriptors. This flag is useful for the same reasons as the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> <tt>O_CLOEXEC</tt> flag described in Section 4.3.1. The <tt>SOCK_NONBLOCK</tt> flag causes the kernel to set the <tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt>
 flag on both underlying open file descriptions, so that future I/O 
operations on the socket will be nonblocking. This saves additional 
calls to <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> to achieve the same result.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
