<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>57.6. The Linux Abstract Socket Namespace</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">57.6. The Linux Abstract Socket Namespace</h3><p class="docText">The so-called <span class="docEmphasis">abstract namespace</span>
 is a Linux-specific feature that allows us to bind a UNIX domain socket
 to a name without that name being created in the file system. This 
provides a few potential advantages:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">We don’t need to worry about possible collisions with existing names in the file system.</p></li><li><p class="docList">It
 is not necessary to unlink the socket pathname when we have finished 
using the socket. The abstract name is automatically removed when the 
socket is closed.</p></li><li><p class="docList">We don’t need to create a file-system pathname for the socket. This may be useful in a <span class="docEmphasis">chroot</span> environment, or if we don’t have write access to a file system.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">To create an abstract binding, we specify the first byte of the <span class="docEmphasis">sun_path</span> field as a null byte (<tt>\0</tt>).
 This distinguishes abstract socket names from conventional UNIX domain 
socket pathnames, which consist of a string of one or more nonnull bytes
 terminated by a null byte. The name of the abstract socket is then 
defined by the remaining bytes (including any null bytes) in <span class="docEmphasis">sun_path</span> up to the length defined for the size of the address structure (i.e., <span class="docEmphasis">addrlen - sizeof(sa_family_t)</span>).</p><p class="docText">Example 57-8 demonstrates the creation of an abstract socket binding.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EATFM">Example 57-8. Creating an abstract socket binding</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedWidth"><span class="docEmphasis">from</span> <b>sockets/us_abstract_bind.c</b>
    struct sockaddr_un addr;

    memset(&amp;addr, 0, sizeof(struct sockaddr_un));  /* Clear address structure */
    addr.sun_family = AF_UNIX;                     /* UNIX domain address */

    /* addr.sun_path[0] has already been set to 0 by memset() */

    str = "xyz";         /* Abstract name is "\0xyz" */
    strncpy(&amp;addr.sun_path[1], str, strlen (str));

    sockfd = socket(AF_UNIX, SOCK_STREAM, 0);
    if (sockfd == -1)
        errExit("socket");

    if (bind(sockfd, (struct sockaddr *) &amp;addr,
            sizeof(sa_family_t) + strlen(str) + 1) == -1)
        errExit("bind");
                                                  <span class="docEmphasis">from</span> <b>sockets/us_abstract_bind.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">The
 fact that an initial null byte is used to distinguish an abstract 
socket name from a conventional socket name can have an unusual 
consequence. Suppose that the variable <span class="docEmphasis">name</span> happens to point to a zero-length string and that we attempt to bind a UNIX domain socket to a <span class="docEmphasis">sun_path</span> initialized as follows:</p><pre>strncpy(addr.sun_path, name, sizeof(addr.sun_path) - 1);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">On Linux, we’ll 
inadvertently create an abstract socket binding. However, such a code 
sequence is probably unintentional (i.e., a bug). On other UNIX 
implementations, the subsequent <span class="docEmphasis">bind()</span> would fail.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
