<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>58.4. The Network Layer: IP</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">58.4. The Network Layer: IP</h3><p class="docText">Above the data-link layer is the <span class="docEmphasis">network layer</span>,
 which is concerned with delivering packets (data) from the source host 
to the destination host. This layer performs a variety of tasks, 
including:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">breaking data into fragments small enough for transmission via the data-link layer (if necessary);</p></li><li><p class="docList">routing data across the internet; and</p></li><li><p class="docList">providing services to the transport layer.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">In
 the TCP/IP protocol suite, the principal protocol in the network layer 
is IP. The version of IP that appeared in the 4.2BSD implementation was 
IP version 4 (IPv4). In the early 1990s, a revised version of IP was 
devised: IP version 6 (IPv6). The most notable difference between the 
two versions is that IPv4 identifies subnets and hosts using 32-bit 
addresses, while IPv6 uses 128-bit addresses, thus providing a much 
larger range of addresses to be assigned to hosts. Although IPv4 is 
still the predominant version of IP in use on the Internet, in coming 
years, it should be supplanted by IPv6. Both IPv4 and IPv6 support the 
higher UDP and TCP transport-layer protocols (as well as many other 
protocols).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Although
 a 32-bit address space theoretically permits billions of IPv4 network 
addresses to be assigned, the manner in which addresses were structured 
and allocated meant that the practical number of available addresses was
 far lower. The possible exhaustion of the IPv4 address space was one of
 the primary motivations for the creation of IPv6.</p><p class="docText">A short history of IPv6 can be found at http://www.laynetworks.com/IPv6.htm.</p><p class="docText">The
 existence of IPv4 and IPv6 begs the question, “What about IPv5?” There 
never was an IPv5 as such. Each IP datagram header includes a 4-bit 
version number field (thus, IPv4 datagrams always have the number 4 in 
this field), and the version number 5 was assigned to an experimental 
protocol, <span class="docEmphasis">Internet Stream Protocol</span>.
 (Version 2 of this protocol, abbreviated as ST-II, is described in RFC 
1819.) Initially conceived in the 1970s, this connection-oriented 
protocol was designed to support voice and video transmission, and 
distributed simulation. Since the IP datagram version number 5 was 
already assigned, the successor to IPv4 was assigned the version number 
6.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Figure 58-2 shows a <span class="docEmphasis">raw</span> socket type (<tt>SOCK_RAW</tt>),
 which allows an application to communicate directly with the IP layer. 
We don’t describe the use of raw sockets, since most applications employ
 sockets over one of the transport-layer protocols (TCP or UDP). Raw 
sockets are described in Chapter 28 of [Stevens et al., 2004]. One instructive example of the use of raw sockets is the <span class="docEmphasis">sendip</span> program (http://www.earth.li/projectpurple/progs/sendip.html),
 which is a command-line-driven tool that allows the construction and 
transmission of IP datagrams with arbitrary contents (including options 
to construct UDP datagrams and TCP segments).</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDZFM">58.4.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EHZFM">58.4.1.1. IP transmits datagrams</h5><p class="docText">IP
 transmits data in the form of datagrams (packets). Each datagram sent 
between two hosts travels independently across the network, possibly 
taking a different route. An IP datagram includes a header, which ranges
 in size from 20 to 60 bytes. The header contains the address of the 
target host, so that the datagram can be routed through the network to 
its destination, and also includes the originating address of the 
packet, so that the receiving host knows the origin of the datagram.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">It
 is possible for a sending host to spoof the originating address of a 
packet, and this forms the basis of a TCP denial-of-service attack known
 as SYN-flooding. [Lemon, 2002] describes the details of this attack and
 the measures used by modern TCP implementations to deal with it.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">An
 IP implementation may place an upper limit on the size of datagrams 
that it supports. All IP implementations must permit datagrams at least 
as large as the limit specified by IP’s <span class="docEmphasis">minimum reassembly buffer size</span>. In IPv4, this limit is 576 bytes; in IPv6, it is 1500 bytes.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E41FM">58.4.1.2. IP is connectionless and unreliable</h5><p class="docText">IP is described as a <span class="docEmphasis">connectionless</span> protocol, since it doesn’t provide the notion of a virtual circuit connecting two hosts. IP is also an <span class="docEmphasis">unreliable</span>
 protocol: it makes a “best effort” to transmit datagrams from the 
sender to the receiver, but doesn’t guarantee that packets will arrive 
in the order they were transmitted, that they won’t be duplicated, or 
even that they will arrive at all. Nor does IP provide error recovery 
(packets with header errors are silently discarded). Reliability must be
 provided either by using a reliable transport-layer protocol (e.g., 
TCP) or within the application itself.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">IPv4
 provides a checksum for the IP header, which allows the detection of 
errors in the header, but doesn’t provide any error detection for the 
data transmitted within the packet. IPv6 doesn’t provide a checksum in 
the IP header, relying on higher-layer protocols to provide error 
checking and reliability as required. (UDP checksums are optional with 
IPv4, but generally enabled; UDP checksums are mandatory with IPv6. TCP 
checksums are mandatory with both IPv4 and IPv6.)</p><p class="docText">Duplication
 of IP datagrams may occur because of techniques employed by some 
data-link layers to ensure reliability or when IP datagrams are tunneled
 through some non-TCP/IP network that employs retransmission.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ET3FM">58.4.1.3. IP may fragment datagrams</h5><p class="docText">IPv4
 datagrams can be up to 65,535 bytes. By default, IPv6 allows datagrams 
of up to 65,575 bytes (40 bytes for the header, 65,535 bytes for data), 
and provides an option for larger datagrams (so-called <span class="docEmphasis">jumbograms</span>).</p><p class="docText">We
 noted earlier that most data-link layers impose an upper limit (the 
MTU) on the size of data frames. For example, this upper limit is 1500 
bytes on the commonly used Ethernet network architecture (i.e., much 
smaller than the maximum size of an IP datagram). IP also defines the 
notion of the <span class="docEmphasis">path MTU</span>.
 This is the minimum MTU on all of the data-link layers traversed on the
 route from the source to the destination. (In practice, the Ethernet 
MTU is often the minimum MTU in a path.)</p><p class="docText">When
 an IP datagram is larger than the MTU, IP fragments (breaks up) the 
datagram into suitably sized units for transmission across the network. 
These fragments are then reassembled at the final destination to 
re-create the original datagram.</p><p class="docText">(Each
 IP fragment is itself an IP datagram that contains an offset field 
giving the location of that fragment within the original datagram.)</p><p class="docText">IP
 fragmentation occurs transparently to higher protocol layers, but 
nevertheless is generally considered undesirable ([Kent &amp; Mogul, 
1987]). The problem is that, because IP doesn’t perform retransmission, 
and a datagram can be reassembled at the destination only if all 
fragments arrive, the entire datagram is unusable if any fragment is 
lost or contains transmission errors. In some cases, this can lead to 
significant rates of data loss (for higher protocol layers that don’t 
perform retransmission, such as UDP) or degraded transfer rates (for 
higher protocol layers that do perform retransmission, such as TCP). 
Modern TCP implementations employ algorithms (<span class="docEmphasis">path MTU discovery</span>)
 to determine the MTU of a path between hosts, and accordingly break up 
the data they pass to IP, so that IP is not asked to transmit datagrams 
that exceed this size. UDP provides no such mechanism, and we consider 
how UDP-based applications can deal with the possibility of IP 
fragmentation in Section 58.6.2.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
