<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>58.7. Requests for Comments (RFCs)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">58.7. Requests for Comments (RFCs)</h3><p class="docText">Each
 of the Internet protocols that we discuss in this book is defined in an
 RFC document—a formal protocol specification. RFCs are published by the
 <span class="docEmphasis">RFC Editor</span> (http://www.rfc-editor.org/), which is funded by the <span class="docEmphasis">Internet Society</span> (http://www.isoc.org/). RFCs that describe Internet standards are developed under the auspices of the <span class="docEmphasis">Internet Engineering Task Force</span> (IETF, http://www.ietf.org/),
 a community of network designers, operators, vendors, and researchers 
concerned with the evolution and smooth operation of the Internet. 
Membership of the IETF is open to any interested individual.</p><p class="docText">The following RFCs are of particular relevance to the material covered in this book:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">RFC 791, <span class="docEmphasis">Internet Protocol</span>. J. Postel (ed.), 1981.</p></li><li><p class="docList">RFC 950, <span class="docEmphasis">Internet Standard Subnetting Procedure</span>. J. Mogul and J. Postel, 1985.</p></li><li><p class="docList">RFC 793, <span class="docEmphasis">Transmission Control Protocol</span>. J. Postel (ed.), 1981.</p></li><li><p class="docList">RFC 768, <span class="docEmphasis">User Datagram Protocol</span>. J. Postel (ed.), 1980.</p></li><li><p class="docList">RFC 1122, <span class="docEmphasis">Requirements for Internet Hosts—Communication Layers</span>. R. Braden (ed.), 1989.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">RFC
 1122 extends (and corrects) various earlier RFCs describing the TCP/IP 
protocols. It is one of a pair of RFCs that are often simply known as 
the <span class="docEmphasis">Host Requirements RFCs</span>. The other member of the pair is RFC 1123, which covers application-layer protocols such as <span class="docEmphasis">telnet</span>, FTP, and SMTP.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Among the RFCs that describe IPv6 are the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">RFC 2460, <span class="docEmphasis">Internet Protocol</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">Version 6</span>. S. Deering and R. Hinden, 1998.</p></li><li><p class="docList">RFC 4291, <span class="docEmphasis">IP Version 6 Addressing Architecture</span>. R. Hinden and S. Deering, 2006.</p></li><li><p class="docList">RFC 3493, <span class="docEmphasis">Basic Socket Interface Extensions for IPv6</span>. R. Gilligan, S. Thomson, J. Bound, J. McCann, and W. Stevens, 2003.</p></li><li><p class="docList">RFC 3542, <span class="docEmphasis">Advanced Sockets API for IPv6</span>. W. Stevens, M. Thomas, E. Nordmark, and T. Jinmei, 2003.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">A number of RFCs and papers provide improvements and extensions to the original TCP specification, including the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Congestion Avoidance and Control</span>.
 V. Jacobsen, 1988. This was the initial paper describing the 
congestion-control and slow-start algorithms for TCP. Originally 
published in <span class="docEmphasis">Proceedings of SIGCOMM ’88</span>, a slightly revised version is available at ftp://ftp.ee.lbl.gov/papers/congavoid.ps.Z. This paper is largely superseded by some of the following RFCs.</p></li><li><p class="docList">RFC 1323, <span class="docEmphasis">TCP Extensions for High Performance</span>. V. Jacobson, R. Braden, and D. Borman, 1992.</p></li><li><p class="docList">RFC 2018, <span class="docEmphasis">TCP Selective Acknowledgment Options</span>. M. Mathis, J. Mahdavi, S. Floyd, and A. Romanow, 1996.</p></li><li><p class="docList">RFC 2581, <span class="docEmphasis">TCP Congestion Control</span>. M. Allman, V. Paxson, and W. Stevens, 1999.</p></li><li><p class="docList">RFC 2861, <span class="docEmphasis">TCP Congestion Window Validation</span>. M. Handley, J. Padhye, and S. Floyd, 2000.</p></li><li><p class="docList">RFC 2883, <span class="docEmphasis">An Extension to the Selective Acknowledgement (SACK) Option for TCP</span>. S. Floyd, J. Mahdavi, M. Mathis, and M. Podolsky, 2000.</p></li><li><p class="docList">RFC 2988, <span class="docEmphasis">Computing TCP’s Retransmission Timer</span>. V. Paxson and M. Allman, 2000.</p></li><li><p class="docList">RFC 3168, <span class="docEmphasis">The Addition of Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) to IP</span>. K. Ramakrishnan, S. Floyd, and D. Black, 2001.</p></li><li><p class="docList">RFC 3390, <span class="docEmphasis">Increasing TCP’s Initial Window</span>. M. Allman, S. Floyd, and C. Partridge, 2002.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
