<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>58.8. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">58.8. Summary</h3><p class="docText">TCP/IP
 is a layered networking protocol suite. At the bottom layer of the 
TCP/IP protocol stack is the IP network-layer protocol. IP transmits 
data in the form of datagrams. IP is connectionless, meaning that 
datagrams transmitted between source and destination hosts may take 
different routes across the network. IP is unreliable, in that it 
provides no guarantee that datagrams will arrive in order or 
unduplicated, or even arrive at all. If reliability is required, then it
 must be provided via the use of a reliable higher-layer protocol (e.g.,
 TCP), or within an application.</p><p class="docText">The
 original version of IP is IPv4. In the early 1990s, a new version of 
IP, IPv6, was devised. The most notable difference between IPv4 and IPv6
 is that IPv4 uses 32 bits to represent a host address, while IPv6 uses 
128 bits, thus allowing for a much larger number of hosts on the 
world-wide Internet. Currently, IPv4 remains the most widely used 
version of IP, although in coming years, it is likely to be supplanted 
by IPv6.</p><p class="docText">Various 
transport-layer protocols are layered on top of IP, of which the most 
widely used are UDP and TCP. UDP is an unreliable datagram protocol. TCP
 is a reliable, connection-oriented, byte-stream protocol. TCP handles 
all of the details of connection establishment and termination. TCP also
 packages data into segments for transmission by IP, and provides 
sequence numbering for these segments so that they can be acknowledged 
and assembled in the correct order by the receiver. In addition, TCP 
provides flow control, to prevent a fast sender from overwhelming a slow
 receiver, and congestion control, to prevent a fast sender from 
overwhelming the network.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EN3FM">58.8.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ER3FM">58.8.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">Refer to the sources of further information listed in Section 59.15.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
