<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>59.3. Data Representation</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">59.3. Data Representation</h3><p class="docText">When
 writing network programs, we need to be aware of the fact that 
different computer architectures use different conventions for 
representing various data types. We have already noted that integer 
types can be stored in big-endian or little-endian form. There are also 
other possible differences. For example, the C <span class="docEmphasis">long</span>
 data type may be 32 bits on some systems and 64 bits on others. When we
 consider structures, the issue is further complicated by the fact that 
different implementations employ different rules for aligning the fields
 of a structure to address boundaries on the host system, leaving 
different numbers of padding bytes between the fields.</p><p class="docText">Because
 of these differences in data representation, applications that exchange
 data between heterogeneous systems over a network must adopt some 
common convention for encoding that data. The sender must encode data 
according to this convention, while the receiver decodes following the 
same convention. The process of putting data into a standard format for 
transmission across a network is referred to as <span class="docEmphasis">marshalling</span>.
 Various marshalling standards exist, such as XDR (External Data 
Representation, described in RFC 1014), ASN.1-BER (Abstract Syntax 
Notation 1, http://www.asn1.org/),
 CORBA, and XML. Typically, these standards define a fixed format for 
each data type (defining, for example, byte order and number of bits 
used). As well as being encoded in the required format, each data item 
is tagged with extra field(s) identifying its type (and, possibly, 
length).</p><p class="docText">However,
 a simpler approach than marshalling is often employed: encode all 
transmitted data in text form, with separate data items delimited by a 
designated character, typically a newline character. One advantage of 
this approach is that we can use <span class="docEmphasis">telnet</span> to debug an application. To do this, we use the following command:</p><pre>$ <b>telnet</b> <b><tt><i>host port</i></tt></b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We can then type lines of text 
to be transmitted to the application, and view the responses sent by the
 application. We demonstrate this technique in Section 59.11.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The
 problems associated with differences in representation across 
heterogeneous systems apply not only to data transfer across a network, 
but also to any mechanism of data exchange between such systems. For 
example, we face the same problems when transferring files on disk or 
tape between heterogeneous systems. Network programming is simply the 
most common programming context in which we are nowadays likely to 
encounter this issue.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If we encode data transmitted on a stream socket as newline-delimited text, then it is convenient to define a function such as <span class="docEmphasis">readLine()</span>, shown in Example 59-1.</p><pre>#include "read_line.h"

ssize_t <b>readLine</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, void *<span class="docEmphasis">buffer</span>, size_t <span class="docEmphasis">n</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns number of bytes copied into <span class="docEmphasis">buffer</span> (excluding terminating null byte), or 0 on end-of-file, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">readLine()</span> function reads bytes from the file referred to by the file descriptor argument <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span> until a newline is encountered. The input byte sequence is returned in the location pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">buffer</span>, which must point to a region of at least <span class="docEmphasis">n</span> bytes of memory. The returned string is always null-terminated; thus, at most <span class="docEmphasis">(n - 1)</span> bytes of actual data will be returned. On success, <span class="docEmphasis">readLine()</span> returns the number of bytes of data placed in <span class="docEmphasis">buffer</span>; the terminating null byte is not included in this count.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EFFGM">Example 59-1. Reading data a line at a time</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>sockets/read_line.c</b>
#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;
#include &lt;errno.h&gt;
#include "read_line.h"                  /* Declaration of readLine() */

ssize_t
readLine(int fd, void *buffer, size_t n)
{
    ssize_t numRead;                    /* # of bytes fetched by last read() */
    size_t totRead;                     /* Total bytes read so far */
    char *buf;
    char ch;

    if (n &lt;= 0 || buffer == NULL) {
        errno = EINVAL;
        return -1;
    }

    buf = buffer;                       /* No pointer arithmetic on "void *" */

    totRead = 0;
    for (;;) {
        numRead = read(fd, &amp;ch, 1);

        if (numRead == -1) {
            if (errno == EINTR)        /* Interrupted --&gt; restart read() */
                continue;
            else
                return -1;              /* Some other error */

        } else if (numRead == 0) {      /* EOF */
            if (totRead == 0)           /* No bytes read; return 0 */
                return 0;
            else                        /* Some bytes read; add '\0' */
                break;

        } else {                        /* 'numRead' must be 1 if we get here */
            if (totRead &lt; n - 1) {      /* Discard &gt; (n - 1) bytes */
                totRead++;
                *buf++ = ch;
            }

            if (ch == '\n')
                break;
        }
    }

    *buf = '\0';
    return totRead;
}
     <b>sockets/read_line.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">If the number of bytes read before a newline is encountered is greater than or equal to <span class="docEmphasis">(n - 1)</span>, then the <span class="docEmphasis">readLine()</span> function discards the excess bytes (including the newline). If a newline was read within the first <span class="docEmphasis">(n - 1)</span>
 bytes, then it is included in the returned string. (Thus, we can 
determine if bytes were discarded by checking if a newline precedes the 
terminating null byte in the returned <span class="docEmphasis">buffer</span>.)
 We take this approach so that application protocols that rely on 
handling input in units of lines don’t end up processing a long line as 
though it were multiple lines. This would likely break the protocol, as 
the applications on either end would become desynchronized. An 
alternative approach would be to have <span class="docEmphasis">readLine()</span>
 read only sufficient bytes to fill the supplied buffer, leaving any 
remaining bytes up to the next newline for the next call to <span class="docEmphasis">readLine()</span>. In this case, the caller of <span class="docEmphasis">readLine()</span> would need to handle the possibility of a partial line being read.</p><p class="docText">We employ the <span class="docEmphasis">readLine()</span> function in the example programs presented in Section 59.11.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
