<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>59.4. Internet Socket Addresses</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">59.4. Internet Socket Addresses</h3><p class="docText">There are two types of Internet domain socket addresses: IPv4 and IPv6.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EICGM">59.4.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EMCGM">59.4.1.1. IPv4 socket addresses: <span class="docEmphasis">struct sockaddr_in</span></h5><p class="docText">An IPv4 socket address is stored in a <span class="docEmphasis">sockaddr_in</span> structure, defined in <tt>&lt;netinet/in.h&gt;</tt> as follows:</p><pre>struct in_addr {                    /* IPv4 4-byte address */
    in_addr_t s_addr;               /* Unsigned 32-bit integer */
};

struct sockaddr_in {                /* IPv4 socket address */
    sa_family_t    sin_family;      /* Address family (AF_INET) */
    in_port_t      sin_port;        /* Port number */
    struct in_addr sin_addr;        /* IPv4 address */
    unsigned char  __pad[X];        /* Pad to size of 'sockaddr'
                                       structure (16 bytes) */
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In Section 56.4, we saw that the generic <span class="docEmphasis">sockaddr</span> structure commences with a field identifying the socket domain. This corresponds to the <span class="docEmphasis">sin_family</span> field in the <span class="docEmphasis">sockaddr_in</span> structure, which is always set to <tt>AF_INET</tt>. The <span class="docEmphasis">sin_port</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sin_addr</span> fields are the port number and the IP address, both in network byte order. The <span class="docEmphasis">in_port_t</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">in_addr_t</span> data types are unsigned integer types, 16 and 32 bits in length, respectively.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EEEGM">59.4.1.2. IPv6 socket addresses: <span class="docEmphasis">struct sockaddr_in6</span></h5><p class="docText">Like
 an IPv4 address, an IPv6 socket address includes an IP address plus a 
port number. The difference is that an IPv6 address is 128 bits instead 
of 32 bits. An IPv6 socket address is stored in a <span class="docEmphasis">sockaddr_in6</span> structure, defined in <tt>&lt;netinet/in.h&gt;</tt> as follows:</p><pre>struct in6_addr {                   /* IPv6 address structure */
    uint8_t s6_addr[16];            /* 16 bytes == 128 bits */
};
struct sockaddr_in6 {               /* IPv6 socket address */
    sa_family_t sin6_family;        /* Address family (AF_INET6) */
    in_port_t   sin6_port;          /* Port number */
    uint32_t    sin6_flowinfo;      /* IPv6 flow information */
    struct in6_addr sin6_addr;      /* IPv6 address */
    uint32_t    sin6_scope_id;      /* Scope ID (new in kernel 2.4) */
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sin_family</span> field is set to <tt>AF_INET6</tt>. The <span class="docEmphasis">sin6_port</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sin6_addr</span> fields are the port number and the IP address. (The <span class="docEmphasis">uint8_t</span> data type, used to type the bytes of the <span class="docEmphasis">in6_addr</span> structure, is an 8-bit unsigned integer.) The remaining fields, <span class="docEmphasis">sin6_flowinfo</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">sin6_scope_id</span>, are beyond the scope of this book; for our purposes, they are always set to 0. All of the fields in the <span class="docEmphasis">sockaddr_in6</span> structure are in network byte order.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">IPv6 addresses are described in RFC 4291. Information about IPv6 flow control (<span class="docEmphasis">sin6_flowinfo</span>) can be found in Appendix A of [Stevens et al., 2004] and in RFCs 2460 and 3697. RFCs 3493 and 4007 provide information about <span class="docEmphasis">sin6_scope_id</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">IPv6
 has equivalents of the IPv4 wildcard and loopback addresses. However, 
their use is complicated by the fact that an IPv6 address is stored in 
an array (rather than using a scalar type). We use the IPv6 wildcard 
address (<tt>0::0</tt>) to illustrate this point. The constant <tt>IN6ADDR_ANY_INIT</tt> is defined for this address as follows:</p><pre>#define IN6ADDR_ANY_INIT { { 0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0 } }</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On Linux, some details in the header files differ from our description in this section. In particular, the <span class="docEmphasis">in6_addr</span>
 structure contains a union definition that divides the 128-bit IPv6 
address into 16 bytes, eight 2-byte integers, or four 32-byte integers. 
Because of the presence of this definition, the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> definition of the <tt>IN6ADDR_ANY_INIT</tt> constant actually includes one more set of nested braces than is shown in the main text.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">We can use the <tt>IN6ADDR_ANY_INIT</tt>
 constant in the initializer that accompanies a variable declaration, 
but can’t use it on the right-hand side of an assignment statement, 
since C syntax doesn’t permit structured constants to be used in 
assignments. Instead, we must use a predefined variable, <span class="docEmphasis">in6addr_any</span>, which is initialized as follows by the C library:</p><pre>const struct in6_addr in6addr_any = IN6ADDR_ANY_INIT;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Thus, we can initialize an IPv6 socket address structure using the wildcard address as follows:</p><pre>struct sockaddr_in6 addr;

memset(&amp;addr, 0, sizeof(struct sockaddr_in6));
addr.sin6_family = AF_INET6;
addr.sin6_addr = in6addr_any;
addr.sin6_port = htons(SOME_PORT_NUM);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The corresponding constant and variable for the IPv6 loopback address (<tt>::1</tt>) are <tt>IN6ADDR_LOOPBACK_INIT</tt> and <span class="docEmphasis">in6addr_loopback</span>.</p><p class="docText">Unlike
 their IPv4 counterparts, the IPv6 constant and variable initializers 
are in network byte order. But, as shown in the above code, we still 
must ensure that the port number is in network byte order.</p><p class="docText">If
 IPv4 and IPv6 coexist on a host, they share the same port-number space.
 This means that if, for example, an application binds an IPv6 socket to
 TCP port 2000 (using the IPv6 wildcard address), then an IPv4 TCP 
socket can’t be bound to the same port. (The TCP/IP implementation 
ensures that sockets on other hosts are able to communicate with this 
socket, regardless of whether those hosts are running IPv4 or IPv6.)</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EWKGM">59.4.1.3. The <span class="docEmphasis">sockaddr_storage</span> structure</h5><p class="docText">With the IPv6 sockets API, the new generic <span class="docEmphasis">sockaddr_storage</span>
 structure was introduced. This structure is defined to be large enough 
to hold any type of socket address (i.e., any type of socket address 
structure can be cast and stored in it). In particular, this structure 
allows us to transparently store either an IPv4 or an IPv6 socket 
address, thus removing IP version dependencies from our code. The <span class="docEmphasis">sockaddr_storage</span> structure is defined on Linux as follows:</p><pre>#define __ss_aligntype uint32_t         /* On 32-bit architectures */
struct sockaddr_storage {
    sa_family_t ss_family;
    __ss_aligntype __ss_align;          /* Force alignment */
    char __ss_padding[SS_PADSIZE];      /* Pad to 128 bytes */
};</pre><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
