<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>59.5. Overview of Host and Service Conversion Functions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">59.5. Overview of Host and Service Conversion Functions</h3><p class="docText">Computers
 represent IP addresses and port numbers in binary. However, humans find
 names easier to remember than numbers. Employing symbolic names also 
provides a useful level of indirection; users and programs can continue 
to use the same name even if the underlying numeric value changes.</p><p class="docText">A <span class="docEmphasis">hostname</span> is the symbolic identifier for a system that is connected to a network (possibly with multiple IP addresses). A <span class="docEmphasis">service name</span> is the symbolic representation of a port number.</p><p class="docText">The following methods are available for representing host addresses and ports:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">A
 host address can be represented as a binary value, as a symbolic 
hostname, or in presentation format (dotted-decimal for IPv4 or 
hex-string for IPv6).</p></li><li><p class="docList">A port can be represented as a binary value or as a symbolic service name.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Various
 library functions are provided for converting between these formats. 
This section briefly summarizes these functions. The following sections 
describe the modern APIs (<span class="docEmphasis">inet_ntop()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">inet_pton()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">getaddrinfo()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">getnameinfo()</span>, and so on) in detail. In Section 59.13, we briefly discuss the obsolete APIs (<span class="docEmphasis">inet_aton()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">inet_ntoa()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyname()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">getservbyname()</span>, and so on).</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EUDGM">59.5.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EYDGM">59.5.1.1. Converting IPv4 addresses between binary and human-readable forms</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">inet_aton()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">inet_ntoa()</span>
 functions convert an IPv4 address in dotted-decimal notation to binary 
and vice versa. We describe these functions primarily because they 
appear in historical code. Nowadays, they are obsolete. Modern programs 
that need to do such conversions should use the functions that we 
describe next.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ECEGM">59.5.1.2. Converting IPv4 and IPv6 addresses between binary and human-readable forms</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">inet_pton()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">inet_ntop()</span> functions are like <span class="docEmphasis">inet_aton()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">inet_ntoa()</span>, but differ in that they also handle IPv6 addresses. They convert binary IPv4 and IPv6 addresses to and from <span class="docEmphasis">presentation</span> format—that is, either dotted-decimal or hex-string notation.</p><p class="docText">Since
 humans deal better with names than with numbers, we normally use these 
functions only occasionally in programs. One use of <span class="docEmphasis">inet_ntop()</span>
 is to produce a printable representation of an IP address for logging 
purposes. Sometimes, it is preferable to use this function instead of 
converting (“resolving”) an IP address to a hostname, for the following 
reasons:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Resolving an IP address to a hostname involves a possibly time-consuming request to a DNS server.</p></li><li><p class="docList">In some circumstances, there may not be a DNS (PTR) record that maps the IP address to a corresponding hostname.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">We describe these functions (in Section 59.6) before <span class="docEmphasis">getaddrinfo()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getnameinfo()</span>,
 which perform conversions between binary representations and the 
corresponding symbolic names, principally because they present a much 
simpler API. This allows us to quickly show some working examples of the
 use of Internet domain sockets.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E1FGM">59.5.1.3. Converting host and service names to and from binary form (obsolete)</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyname()</span> function returns the binary IP address(es) corresponding to a hostname and the <span class="docEmphasis">getservbyname()</span> function returns the port number corresponding to a service name. The reverse conversions are performed by <span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyaddr()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getservbyport()</span>.
 We describe these functions because they are widely used in existing 
code. However, they are now obsolete. (SUSv3 marks these functions 
obsolete, and SUSv4 removes their specifications.) New code should use 
the <span class="docEmphasis">getaddrinfo()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getnameinfo()</span> functions (described next) for such conversions.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EAHGM">59.5.1.4. Converting host and service names to and from binary form (modern)</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getaddrinfo()</span> function is the modern successor to both <span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyname()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getservbyname()</span>. Given a hostname and a service name, <span class="docEmphasis">getaddrinfo()</span> returns a set of structures containing the corresponding binary IP address(es) and port number. Unlike <span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyname()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">getaddrinfo()</span>
 transparently handles both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses. Thus, we can use it
 to write programs that don’t contain dependencies on the IP version 
being employed. All new code should use <span class="docEmphasis">getaddrinfo()</span> for converting hostnames and service names to binary representation.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getnameinfo()</span>
 function performs the reverse translation, converting an IP address and
 port number into the corresponding hostname and service name.</p><p class="docText">We can also use <span class="docEmphasis">getaddrinfo()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getnameinfo()</span> to convert binary IP addresses to and from presentation format.</p><p class="docText">The discussion of <span class="docEmphasis">getaddrinfo()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getnameinfo()</span>, in Section 59.10, requires an accompanying description of DNS (Section 59.8) and the <tt>/etc/services</tt> file (Section 59.9).
 DNS allows cooperating servers to maintain a distributed database that 
maps binary IP addresses to hostnames and vice versa. The existence of a
 system such as DNS is essential to the operation of the Internet, since
 centralized management of the enormous set of Internet hostnames would 
be impossible. The <tt>/etc/services</tt> file maps port numbers to symbolic service names.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
