<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>59.9. The /etc/services File</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">59.9. The <tt>/etc/services</tt> File</h3><p class="docText">As noted in Section 58.6.1, well-known port numbers are centrally registered by IANA. Each of these ports has a corresponding <span class="docEmphasis">service name</span>.
 Because service numbers are centrally managed and are less volatile 
than IP addresses, an equivalent of the DNS server is usually not 
necessary. Instead, the port numbers and service names are recorded in 
the file <tt>/etc/services</tt>. The <span class="docEmphasis">getaddrinfo()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getnameinfo()</span> functions use the information in this file to convert service names to port numbers and vice versa.</p><p class="docText">The <tt>/etc/services</tt> file consists of lines containing three columns, as shown in the following examples:</p><pre># Service name  port/protocol  [aliases]
echo            7/tcp          Echo     # echo service
echo            7/udp          Echo
ssh             22/tcp                  # Secure Shell
ssh             22/udp
telnet          23/tcp                  # Telnet
telnet          23/udp
smtp            25/tcp                  # Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
smtp            25/udp
domain          53/tcp                  # Domain Name Server
domain          53/udp
http            80/tcp                  # Hypertext Transfer Protocol
http            80/udp
ntp             123/tcp                 # Network Time Protocol
ntp             123/udp
login           513/tcp                 # rlogin(1)
who             513/udp                 # rwho(1)
shell           514/tcp                 # rsh(1)
syslog          514/udp                 # syslog</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">protocol</span> is typically either <tt>tcp</tt> or <tt>udp</tt>. The optional (space-delimited) <span class="docEmphasis">aliases</span> specify alternative names for the service. In addition to the above, lines may include comments starting with the <tt>#</tt> character.</p><p class="docText">As
 noted previously, a given port number refers to distinct entities for 
UDP and TCP, but IANA policy assigns both port numbers to a service, 
even if that service uses only one protocol. For example, <span class="docEmphasis">telnet</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ssh</span>,
 HTTP, and SMTP all use TCP, but the corresponding UDP port is also 
assigned to these services. Conversely, NTP uses only UDP, but the TCP 
port 123 is also assigned to this service. In some cases, a service uses
 both UDP and TCP; DNS and <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span>
 are examples of such services. Finally, there are a very few cases 
where the UDP and TCP ports with the same number are assigned to 
different services; for example, <span class="docEmphasis">rsh</span> uses TCP port 514, while the <span class="docEmphasis">syslog</span> daemon (Section 37.5) uses UDP port 514. This is because these port numbers were assigned before the adoption of the present IANA policy.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <tt>/etc/services</tt> file is merely a record of name-to-number mappings. It is not a reservation mechanism: the appearance of a port number in <tt>/etc/services</tt> doesn’t guarantee that it will actually be available for binding by a particular service.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
