<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>59.13. Obsolete APIs for Host and Service Conversions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">59.13. Obsolete APIs for Host and Service Conversions</h3><p class="docText">In
 the following sections, we describe the older, now obsolete functions 
for converting host names and service names to and from binary and 
presentation formats. Although new programs should perform these 
conversions using the modern functions described earlier in this 
chapter, a knowledge of the obsolete functions is useful because we may 
encounter them in older code.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EUPGM">59.13.1. The <span class="docEmphasis">inet_aton()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">inet_ntoa()</span> Functions</h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">inet_aton()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">inet_ntoa()</span>
 functions convert IPv4 addresses between dotted-decimal notation and 
binary form (in network byte order). These functions are nowadays made 
obsolete by <span class="docEmphasis">inet_pton()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">inet_ntop()</span>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">inet_aton()</span> (“ASCII to network”) function converts the dotted-decimal string pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">str</span> into an IPv4 address in network byte order, which is returned in the <span class="docEmphasis">in_addr</span> structure pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;arpa/inet.h&gt;

int <b>inet_aton</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">str</span>, struct in_addr *<span class="docEmphasis">addr</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 1 (true) if <span class="docEmphasis">str</span> is a valid dotted-decimal address, or 0 (false) on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">inet_aton()</span> function returns 1 if the conversion was successful, or 0 if <span class="docEmphasis">str</span> was invalid.</p><p class="docText">The numeric components of the string given to <span class="docEmphasis">inet_aton()</span>
 need not be decimal. They can be octal (specified by a leading 0) or 
hexadecimal (specified by a leading 0x or 0X). Furthermore, <span class="docEmphasis">inet_aton()</span> supports shorthand forms that allow an address to be specified using fewer than four numeric components. (See the <span class="docEmphasis">inet(3)</span> manual page for details.) The term <span class="docEmphasis">numbers-and-dots notation</span> is used for the more general address strings that employ these features.</p><p class="docText">SUSv3 doesn’t specify <span class="docEmphasis">inet_aton()</span>. Nevertheless, this function is available on most implementations. On Linux, we must define one of the feature test macros <tt>_BSD_SOURCE</tt>, <tt>_SVID_SOURCE</tt>, or <tt>_GNU_SOURCE</tt> in order to obtain the declaration of <span class="docEmphasis">inet_aton()</span> from <tt>&lt;arpa/inet.h&gt;</tt>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">inet_ntoa()</span> (“network to ASCII”) function performs the converse of <span class="docEmphasis">inet_aton()</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;arpa/inet.h&gt;

char *<b>inet_ntoa</b>(struct in_addr <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns pointer to (statically allocated) dotted-decimal string version of <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span></p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Given an <span class="docEmphasis">in_addr</span> structure (a 32-bit IPv4 address in network byte order), <span class="docEmphasis">inet_ntoa()</span> returns a pointer to a (statically allocated) string containing the address in dotted-decimal notation.</p><p class="docText">Because the string returned by <span class="docEmphasis">inet_ntoa()</span> is statically allocated, it is overwritten by successive calls.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EUTGM">59.13.2. The <span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyname()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyaddr()</span> Functions</h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyname()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyaddr()</span> functions allow conversion between hostnames and IP addresses. These functions are nowadays made obsolete by <span class="docEmphasis">getaddrinfo()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getnameinfo()</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;netdb.h&gt;

extern int <b>h_errno</b>;

struct hostent *<b>gethostbyname</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">name</span>);
struct hostent *<b>gethostbyaddr</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">addr</span>, socklen_t <span class="docEmphasis">len</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">type</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Both return pointer to (statically allocated) <span class="docEmphasis">hostent</span> structure on success, or NULL on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyname()</span> function resolves the hostname given in <span class="docEmphasis">name</span>, returning a pointer to a statically allocated <span class="docEmphasis">hostent</span> structure containing information about that hostname. This structure has the following form:</p><pre>struct hostent {
    char  *h_name;              /* Official (canonical) name of host */
    char **h_aliases;           /* NULL-terminated array of pointers
                                   to alias strings */
    int    h_addrtype;          /* Address type (AF_INET or AF_INET6) */
    int    h_length;            /* Length (in bytes) of addresses pointed
                                   to by h_addr_list (4 bytes for AF_INET,
                                   16 bytes for AF_INET6) */
    char **h_addr_list;         /* NULL-terminated array of pointers to
                                   host IP addresses (in_addr or in6_addr
                                   structures) in network byte order */
};

#define h_addr  h_addr_list[0]</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">h_name</span> field returns the official name of the host, as a null-terminated string. The <span class="docEmphasis">h_aliases</span> fields points to an array of pointers to null-terminated strings containing aliases (alternative names) for this hostname.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">h_addr_list</span>
 field is an array of pointers to IP address structures for this host. 
(A multihomed host has more than one address.) This list consists of 
either <span class="docEmphasis">in_addr</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">in6_addr</span> structures. We can determine the type of these structures from the <span class="docEmphasis">h_addrtype</span> field, which contains either <tt>AF_INET</tt> or <tt>AF_INET6</tt>, and their length from the <span class="docEmphasis">h_length</span> field. The <span class="docEmphasis">h_addr</span>
 definition is provided for backward compatibility with earlier 
implementations (e.g., 4.2BSD) that returned just one address in the <span class="docEmphasis">hostent</span> structure. Some existing code relies on this name (and thus is not multihomed-host aware).</p><p class="docText">With modern versions of <span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyname()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">name</span>
 can also be specified as a numeric IP address string; that is, 
numbers-and-dots notation for IPv4 or hex-string notation for IPv6. In 
this case, no lookup is performed; instead, <span class="docEmphasis">name</span> is copied into the <span class="docEmphasis">h_name</span> field of the <span class="docEmphasis">hostent</span> structure, and <span class="docEmphasis">h_addr_list</span> is set to the binary equivalent of <span class="docEmphasis">name</span>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyaddr()</span> function performs the converse of <span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyname()</span>. Given a binary IP address, it returns a <span class="docEmphasis">hostent</span> structure containing information about the host with that address.</p><p class="docText">On error (e.g., a name could not be resolved), both <span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyname()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyaddr()</span> return a <tt>NULL</tt> pointer and set the global variable <span class="docEmphasis">h_errno</span>. As the name suggests, this variable is analogous to <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> (possible values placed in this variable are described in the <span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyname(3)</span> manual page), and the <span class="docEmphasis">herror()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">hstrerror()</span> functions are analogous to <span class="docEmphasis">perror()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">strerror()</span>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">herror()</span> function displays (on standard error) the string given in <span class="docEmphasis">str</span>, followed by a colon (<tt>:</tt>), and then a message for the current error in <span class="docEmphasis">h_errno</span>. Alternatively, we can use <span class="docEmphasis">hstrerror()</span> to obtain a pointer to a string corresponding to the error value specified in <span class="docEmphasis">err</span>.</p><pre>#define _BSD_SOURCE           /* Or _SVID_SOURCE or _GNU_SOURCE */
#include &lt;netdb.h&gt;

void <b>herror</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">str</span>);

const char *<b>hstrerror</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">err</span>);
Returns pointer to <span class="docEmphasis">h_errno</span> error string corresponding to <span class="docEmphasis">err</span></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Example 59-10 demonstrates the use of <span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyname()</span>. This program displays <span class="docEmphasis">hostent</span> information for each of the hosts named on its command line. The following shell session demonstrates the use of this program:</p><pre>$ <b>./t_gethostbyname www.jambit.com</b>
Canonical name: jamjam1.jambit.com
        alias(es):      www.jambit.com
        address type:   AF_INET
        address(es):    62.245.207.90</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EG4GM">Example 59-10. Using <span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyname()</span> to retrieve host information</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>sockets/t_gethostbyname.c</b>
#define _BSD_SOURCE     /* To get hstrerror() declaration from &lt;netdb.h&gt; */
#include &lt;netdb.h&gt;
#include &lt;netinet/in.h&gt;
#include &lt;arpa/inet.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    struct hostent *h;
    char **pp;
    char str[INET6_ADDRSTRLEN];

    for (argv++; *argv != NULL; argv++) {
        h = gethostbyname(*argv);
        if (h == NULL) {
            fprintf(stderr, "gethostbyname() failed for '%s': %s\n",
                    *argv, hstrerror(h_errno));
            continue;
        }

        printf("Canonical name: %s\n", h-&gt;h_name);

        printf("        alias(es):     ");
        for (pp = h-&gt;h_aliases; *pp != NULL; pp++)
            printf(" %s", *pp);
        printf("\n");

        printf("        address type:   %s\n",
                (h-&gt;h_addrtype == AF_INET) ? "AF_INET" :
                (h-&gt;h_addrtype == AF_INET6) ? "AF_INET6" : "???");

        if (h-&gt;h_addrtype == AF_INET || h-&gt;h_addrtype == AF_INET6) {
            printf("        address(es):   ");
            for (pp = h-&gt;h_addr_list; *pp != NULL; pp++)
                printf(" %s", inet_ntop(h-&gt;h_addrtype, *pp,
                                        str, INET6_ADDRSTRLEN));
            printf("\n");
        }
    }

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>sockets/t_gethostbyname.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EU4GM">59.13.3. The <span class="docEmphasis">getservbyname()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getservbyport()</span> Functions</h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getservbyname()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getservbyport()</span> functions retrieve records from the <tt>/etc/services</tt> file (Section 59.9). These functions are nowadays made obsolete by <span class="docEmphasis">getaddrinfo()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getnameinfo()</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;netdb.h&gt;

struct servent *<b>getservbyname</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">name</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">proto</span>);
struct servent *<b>getservbyport</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">port</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">proto</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Both return pointer to a (statically allocated) <span class="docEmphasis">servent</span> structure on success, or <tt>NULL</tt> on not found or error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getservbyname()</span> function looks up the record whose service name (or one of its aliases) matches <span class="docEmphasis">name</span> and whose protocol matches <span class="docEmphasis">proto</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">proto</span> argument is a string such as <span class="docEmphasis">tcp</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">udp</span>, or it can be <tt>NULL</tt>. If <span class="docEmphasis">proto</span> is specified as <tt>NULL</tt>, any record whose service name matches <span class="docEmphasis">name</span> is returned. (This is usually sufficient since, where both UDP and TCP records with the same name exist in the <tt>/etc/services</tt> file, they normally have the same port number.) If a matching record is found, then <span class="docEmphasis">getservbyname()</span> returns a pointer to a statically allocated structure of the following type:</p><pre>struct servent {
    char  *s_name;          /* Official service name */
    char **s_aliases;       /* Pointers to aliases (NULL-terminated) */
    int    s_port;          /* Port number (in network byte order) */
    char  *s_proto;         /* Protocol */
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Typically, we call <span class="docEmphasis">getservbyname()</span> only in order to obtain the port number, which is returned in the <span class="docEmphasis">s_port</span> field.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getservbyport()</span> function performs the converse of <span class="docEmphasis">getservbyname()</span>. It returns a <span class="docEmphasis">servent</span> record containing information from the <tt>/etc/services</tt> record whose port number matches <span class="docEmphasis">port</span> and whose protocol matches <span class="docEmphasis">proto</span>. Again, we can specify <span class="docEmphasis">proto</span> as <tt>NULL</tt>, in which case the call will return any record whose port number matches the one specified in <span class="docEmphasis">port</span>.
 (This may not return the desired result in the few cases mentioned 
above where the same port number maps to different service names in UDP 
and TCP.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">An example of the use of the <span class="docEmphasis">getservbyname()</span> function is provided in the file <tt>files/t_getservbyname.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
