<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>59.14. UNIX Versus Internet Domain Sockets</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">59.14. UNIX Versus Internet Domain Sockets</h3><p class="docText">When
 writing applications that communicate over a network, we must 
necessarily use Internet domain sockets. However, when using sockets to 
communicate between applications on the same system, we have the choice 
of using either Internet or UNIX domain sockets. In the case, which 
domain should we use and why?</p><p class="docText">Writing
 an application using just Internet domain sockets is often the simplest
 approach, since it will work on both a single host and across a 
network. However, there are some reasons why we may choose to use UNIX 
domain sockets:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">On some implementations, UNIX domain sockets are faster than Internet domain sockets.</p></li><li><p class="docList">We
 can use directory (and, on Linux, file) permissions to control access 
to UNIX domain sockets, so that only applications with a specified user 
or group ID can connect to a listening stream socket or send a datagram 
to a datagram socket. This provides a simple method of authenticating 
clients. With Internet domain sockets, we need to do rather more work if
 we wish to authenticate clients.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Using UNIX domain sockets, we can pass open file descriptors and sender credentials, as summarized in Section 61.13.3.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
