<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>59.15. Further Information</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">59.15. Further Information</h3><p class="docText">There is a wealth of printed and online resources on TCP/IP and the sockets API:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The
 key book on network programming with the sockets API is [Stevens at 
al., 2004]. [Snader, 2000] adds some useful guidelines on sockets 
programming.</p></li><li><p class="docList">[Stevens,
 1994] and [Wright &amp; Stevens, 1995] describe TCP/IP in detail. 
[Comer, 2000], [Comer &amp; Stevens, 1999], [Comer &amp; Stevens, 2000],
 [Kozierok, 2005], and [Goralksi, 2009] also provide good coverage of 
the same material.</p></li><li><p class="docList">[Tanenbaum, 2002] provides general background on computer networks.</p></li><li><p class="docList">[Herbert, 2004] describes the details of the Linux 2.6 TCP/IP stack.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The GNU C library manual (online at http://www.gnu.org/) has an extensive discussion of the sockets API.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The IBM Redbook, <span class="docEmphasis">TCP/IP Tutorial and Technical Overview</span>,
 provides lengthy coverage of networking concepts, TCP/IP internals, the
 sockets API, and a host of related topics. It is freely downloadable 
from http://www.redbooks.ibm.com/.</p></li><li><p class="docList">[Gont, 2008] and [Gont, 2009b] provide security assessments of IPv4 and TCP.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The Usenet newsgroup <span class="docEmphasis">comp.protocols.tcp-ip</span> is dedicated to questions related to the TCP/IP networking protocols.</p></li><li><p class="docList">[Sarolahti &amp; Kuznetsov, 2002] describes congestion control and other details of the Linux TCP implementation.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Linux-specific information can be found in the following manual pages: <span class="docEmphasis">socket(7)</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ip(7)</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">raw(7)</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">tcp(7)</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">udp(7)</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">packet(7)</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">See also the RFC list in Section 58.7.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
