<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>59.16. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">59.16. Summary</h3><p class="docText">Internet
 domain sockets allow applications on different hosts to communicate via
 a TCP/IP network. An Internet domain socket address consists of an IP 
address and a port number. In IPv4, an IP address is a 32-bit number; in
 IPv6, it is a 128-bit number. Internet domain datagram sockets operate 
over UDP, providing connectionless, unreliable, message-oriented 
communication. Internet domain stream sockets operate over TCP, and 
provide a reliable, bidirectional, byte-stream communication channel 
between two connected applications.</p><p class="docText">Different
 computer architectures use different conventions for representing data 
types. For example, integers may be stored in little-endian or 
big-endian form, and different computers may use different numbers of 
bytes to represent numeric types such as <span class="docEmphasis">int</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">long</span>.
 These differences mean that we need to employ some 
architecture-independent representation when transferring data between 
heterogeneous machines connected via a network. We noted that various 
marshalling standards exist to deal this problem, and also described a 
simple solution used by many applications: encoding all transmitted data
 in text form, with fields delimited by a designated character (usually a
 newline).</p><p class="docText">We looked at a range
 of functions that can be used to convert between (numeric) string 
representations of IP addresses (dotted-decimal for IPv4 and hex-string 
for IPv6) and their binary equivalents. However, it is generally 
preferable to use host and service names rather than numbers, since 
names are easier to remember and continue to be usable, even if the 
corresponding number is changed. We looked at various functions that 
convert host and service names to their numeric equivalents and vice 
versa. The modern function for translating host and service names into 
socket addresses is <span class="docEmphasis">getaddrinfo()</span>, but it is common to see the historical functions <span class="docEmphasis">gethostbyname()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getservbyname()</span> in existing code.</p><p class="docText">Consideration
 of hostname conversions led us into a discussion of DNS, which 
implements a distributed database for a hierarchical directory service. 
The advantage of DNS is that the management of the database is not 
centralized. Instead, local zone administrators update changes for the 
hierarchical component of the database for which they are responsible, 
and DNS servers communicate with one another in order to resolve a 
hostname.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
