<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>59.17. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">59.17. Exercises</h3><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">When reading large quantities of data, the <span class="docEmphasis">readLine()</span> function shown in Example 59-1
 is inefficient, since a system call is required to read each character.
 A more efficient interface would read a block of characters into a 
buffer and extract a line at a time from this buffer. Such an interface 
might consist of two functions. The first of these functions, which 
might be called <span class="docEmphasis">readLineBufInit(fd</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">&amp;rlbuf)</span>, initializes the bookkeeping data structure pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">rlbuf</span>.
 This structure includes space for a data buffer, the size of that 
buffer, and a pointer to the next “unread” character in that buffer. It 
also includes a copy of the file descriptor given in the argument <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>. The second function, <span class="docEmphasis">readLineBuf(&amp;rlbuf)</span>, returns the next line from the buffer associated with <span class="docEmphasis">rlbuf</span>. If required, this function reads a further block of data from the file descriptor saved in <span class="docEmphasis">rlbuf</span>. Implement these two functions. Modify the programs in Example 59-6 (<tt>is_seqnum_sv.c</tt>) and Example 59-7 (<tt>is_seqnum_cl.c</tt>) to use these functions.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Modify the programs in Example 59-6 (<tt>is_seqnum_sv.c</tt>) and Example 59-7 (<tt>is_seqnum_cl.c</tt>) to use the <span class="docEmphasis">inetListen()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">inetConnect()</span> functions provided in Example 59-9 (<tt>inet_sockets.c</tt>).</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write a UNIX domain sockets library with an API similar to the Internet domain sockets library shown in Section 59.12. Rewrite the programs in Example 57-3 (<tt>us_xfr_sv.c</tt>, in Section 57.2) and Example 57-4 (<tt>us_xfr_cl.c</tt>, in Section 57.2) to use this library.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write
 a network server that stores name-value pairs. The server should allow 
names to be added, deleted, modified, and retrieved by clients. Write 
one or more client programs to test the server. Optionally, implement 
some kind of security mechanism that allows only the client that created
 the name to delete it or to modify the value associated with it.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Suppose
 that we create two Internet domain datagram sockets, bound to specific 
addresses, and connect the first socket to the second. What happens if 
we create a third datagram socket and try to send (<span class="docEmphasis">sendto()</span>) a datagram via that socket to the first socket? Write a program to determine the answer.</p></div></li></ol></div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
