<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>60.1. Iterative and Concurrent Servers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">60.1. Iterative and Concurrent Servers</h3><p class="docText">Two common designs for network servers using sockets are the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Iterative</span>: The server handles one client at a time, processing that client’s request(s) completely, before proceeding to the next client.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Concurrent</span>: The server is designed to handle multiple clients simultaneously.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">We have already seen an example of an iterative server using FIFOs in Section 44.8 and an example of a concurrent server using System V message queues in Section 46.8.</p><p class="docText">Iterative
 servers are usually suitable only when client requests can be handled 
quickly, since each client must wait until all of the preceding clients 
have been serviced. A typical scenario for employing an iterative server
 is where the client and server exchange a single request and response.</p><p class="docText">Concurrent
 servers are suitable when a significant amount of processing time is 
required to handle each request, or where the client and server engage 
in an extended conversation, passing messages back and forth. In this 
chapter, we mainly focus on the traditional (and simplest) method of 
designing a concurrent server: creating a new child process for each new
 client. Each server child performs all tasks necessary to service a 
single client and then terminates. Since each of these processes can 
operate independently, multiple clients can be handled simultaneously. 
The principal task of the main server process (the parent) is to create a
 new child process for each new client. (A variation on this approach is
 to create a new thread for each client.)</p><p class="docText">In
 the following sections, we look at examples of an iterative and a 
concurrent server using Internet domain sockets. These two servers 
implement the <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span> service (RFC 862), a rudimentary service that returns a copy of whatever the client sends it.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
