<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>60.4. Other Concurrent Server Designs</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">60.4. Other Concurrent Server Designs</h3><p class="docText">The
 traditional concurrent server model described in the previous section 
is adequate for many applications that need to simultaneously handle 
multiple clients via TCP connections. However, for very high-load 
servers (for example, web servers handling thousands of requests per 
minute), the cost of creating a new child (or even thread) for each 
client imposes a significant burden on the server (refer to Section 28.3), and alternative designs need to be employed. We briefly consider some of these alternatives.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJYGM">60.4.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ENYGM">60.4.1.1. Preforked and prethreaded servers</h5><p class="docText">Preforked and prethreaded servers are described in some detail in Chapter 30 of [Stevens et al., 2004]. The key ideas are the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Instead
 of creating a new child process (or thread) for each client, the server
 precreates a fixed number of child processes (or threads) immediately 
on startup (i.e., before any client requests are even received). These 
children constitute a so-called <span class="docEmphasis">server pool</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Each
 child in the server pool handles one client at a time, but instead of 
terminating after handling the client, the child fetches the next client
 to be serviced and services it, and so on.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Employing
 the above technique requires some careful management within the server 
application. The server pool should be large enough to ensure adequate 
response to client requests. This means that the server parent must 
monitor the number of unoccupied children, and, in times of peak load, 
increase the size of the pool so that there are always enough child 
processes available to immediately serve new clients. If the load 
decreases, then the size of the server pool should be reduced, since 
having excess processes on the system can degrade overall system 
performance.</p><p class="docText">In addition, 
the children in the server pool must follow some protocol to allow them 
to exclusively select individual client connections. On most UNIX 
implementations (including Linux), it is sufficient to have each child 
in the pool block in an <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span>
 call on the listening descriptor. In other words, the server parent 
creates the listening socket before creating any children, and each of 
the children inherits a file descriptor for the socket during the <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>. When a new client connection arrives, only one of the children will complete the <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span> call. However, because <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span>
 is not an atomic system call on some older implementations, the call 
may need to be bracketed by some mutual-exclusion technique (e.g., a 
file lock) to ensure that only one child at a time performs the call 
([Stevens et al., 2004]).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">There are alternatives to having all of the children in the server pool perform <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span> calls. If the server pool consists of separate processes, the server parent can perform the <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span>
 call, and then pass the file descriptor containing the new connection 
to one of the free processes in the pool, using a technique that we 
briefly describe in Section 61.13.3. If the server pool consists of threads, the main thread can perform the <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span> call, and then inform one of the free server threads that a new client is available on the connected descriptor.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EA1GM">60.4.1.2. Handling multiple clients from a single process</h5><p class="docText">In
 some cases, we can design a single server process to handle multiple 
clients. To do this, we must employ one of the I/O models (I/O 
multiplexing, signal-driven I/O, or <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>) that allow a single process to simultaneously monitor multiple file descriptors for I/O events. These models are described in Chapter 63.</p><p class="docText">In
 a single-server design, the server process must take on some of the 
scheduling tasks that are normally handled by the kernel. In a solution 
that involves one server process per client, we can rely on the kernel 
to ensure that each server process (and thus client) gets a fair share 
of access to the resources of the server host. But when we use a single 
server process to handle multiple clients, the server must do some work 
to ensure that one or a few clients don’t monopolize access to the 
server while other clients are starved. We say a little more about this 
point in Section 63.4.6.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EA2GM">60.4.1.3. Using server farms</h5><p class="docText">Other approaches to handling high client loads involve the use of multiple server systems—a <span class="docEmphasis">server farm</span>.</p><p class="docText">One of the simplest approaches to building a server farm (employed by some web servers) is <span class="docEmphasis">DNS round-robin load sharing</span> (or <span class="docEmphasis">load distribution</span>),
 where the authoritative name server for a zone maps the same domain 
name to several IP addresses (i.e., several servers share the same 
domain name). Successive requests to the DNS server to resolve the 
domain name return these IP addresses in round-robin order. Further 
information about DNS round-robin load sharing can be found in [Albitz 
&amp; Liu, 2006].</p><p class="docText">Round-robin
 DNS has the advantage of being inexpensive and easy to set up. However,
 it does have some shortcomings. A DNS server performing iterative 
resolution may cache its results (see Section 59.8),
 with the result that future queries on the domain name return the same 
IP address, instead of the round-robin sequence generated by the 
authoritative DNS server. Also, round-robin DNS doesn’t have any 
built-in mechanisms for ensuring good load balancing (different clients 
may place different loads on a server) or ensuring high availability 
(what if one of the servers dies or the server application that it is 
running crashes?). Another issue that we may need to consider—one that 
is faced by many designs that employ multiple server machines—is 
ensuring <span class="docEmphasis">server affinity</span>;
 that is, ensuring that a sequence of requests from the same client are 
all directed to the same server, so that any state information 
maintained by the server about the client remains accurate.</p><p class="docText">A more flexible, but also more complex, solution is <span class="docEmphasis">server load balancing</span>.
 In this scenario, a single load-balancing server routes incoming client
 requests to one of the members of the server farm. (To ensure high 
availability, there may be a backup server that takes over if the 
primary load-balancing server crashes.) This eliminates the problems 
associated with remote DNS caching, since the server farm presents a 
single IP address (that of the load-balancing server) to the outside 
world. The load-balancing server incorporates algorithms to measure or 
estimate server load (perhaps based on metrics supplied by the members 
of the server farm) and intelligently distribute the load across the 
members of the server farm. The load-balancing server also automatically
 detects failures in members of the server farm (and the addition of new
 servers, if demand requires it). Finally, a load-balancing server may 
also provide support for server affinity. Further information about 
server load balancing can be found in [Kopparapu, 2002].</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
