<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>60.5. The inetd (Internet Superserver) Daemon</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">60.5. The <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> (Internet Superserver) Daemon</h3><p class="docText">If we look through the contents of <tt>/etc/services</tt>,
 we see literally hundreds of different services listed. This implies 
that a system could theoretically be running a large number of server 
processes. However, most of these servers would usually be doing nothing
 but waiting for infrequent connection requests or datagrams. All of 
these server processes would nevertheless occupy slots in the kernel 
process table, and consume some memory and swap space, thus placing a 
load on the system.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> daemon is designed to eliminate the need to run large numbers of infrequently used servers. Using <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> provides two main benefits:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Instead of running a separate daemon for each service, a single process—the <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span>
 daemon—monitors a specified set of socket ports and starts other 
servers as required. Thus, the number of processes running on the system
 is reduced.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The programming of the servers started by <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> is simplified, because <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> performs several of the steps that are commonly required by all network servers on startup.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Since it oversees a range of services, invoking other servers as required, <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> is sometimes known as the <span class="docEmphasis">Internet superserver</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">An extended version of <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">xinetd</span>, is provided in some Linux distributions. Among other things, <span class="docEmphasis">xinetd</span> adds a number of security enhancements. Information about <span class="docEmphasis">xinetd</span> can be found at http://www.xinetd.org/.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJ1GM">60.5.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EN1GM">60.5.1.1. Operation of the <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> daemon</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> daemon is normally started during system boot. After becoming a daemon process (Section 37.2), <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> performs the following steps:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">For each of the services specified in its configuration file, <tt>/etc/inetd.conf</tt>, <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span>
 creates a socket of the appropriate type (i.e., stream or datagram) and
 binds it to the specified port. Each TCP socket is additionally marked 
to permit incoming connections via a call to <span class="docEmphasis">listen()</span>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Using the <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> system call (Section 63.2.1), <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> monitors all of the sockets created in the preceding step for datagrams or incoming connection requests.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>
 call blocks until either a UDP socket has a datagram available to read 
or a connection request is received on a TCP socket. In the case of a 
TCP connection, <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> performs an <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span> for the connection before proceeding to the next step.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">To start the server specified for this socket, <span class="docEmphasis">inetd()</span> calls <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> to create a new process that then does an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> to start the server program. Before performing the <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, the child process performs the following steps:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Close
 all of the file descriptors inherited from its parent, except the one 
for the socket on which the UDP datagram is available or the TCP 
connection has been accepted.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Use the techniques described in Section 5.5
 to duplicate the socket file descriptor on file descriptors 0, 1, and 
2, and close the socket file descriptor itself (since it is no longer 
required). After this step, the execed server is able to communicate on 
the socket by using the three standard file descriptors.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Optionally, set the user and group IDs for the execed server to values specified in <tt>/etc/inetd.conf</tt>.</p></div></li></ol></div></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If a connection was accepted on a TCP socket in step 3, <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> closes the connected socket (since it is needed only in the execed server).</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> server returns to step 2.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ER4GM">60.5.1.2. The <tt>/etc/inetd.conf</tt> file</h5><p class="docText">The operation of the <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> daemon is controlled by a configuration file, normally /<tt>etc/inetd.conf</tt>. Each line in this file describes one of the services to be handled by <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span>. Example 60-5 shows some examples of entries in the <tt>/etc/inetd.conf</tt> file that comes with one Linux distribution.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EQ5GM">Example 60-5. Example lines from <tt>/etc/inetd.conf</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre># echo  stream  tcp  nowait  root    internal
# echo  dgram   udp  wait    root    internal
ftp     stream  tcp  nowait  root    /usr/sbin/tcpd   in.ftpd
telnet  stream  tcp  nowait  root    /usr/sbin/tcpd   in.telnetd
login   stream  tcp  nowait  root    /usr/sbin/tcpd   in.rlogind</pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">The first two lines of Example 60-5 are commented out by the initial <tt>#</tt> character; we show them now since we’ll refer to the <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span> service shortly.</p><p class="docText">Each line of <tt>/etc/inetd.conf</tt> consists of the following fields, delimited by white space:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Service name</span>: This specifies the name of a service from the <tt>/etc/services</tt> file. In conjunction with the <span class="docEmphasis">protocol</span> field, this is used to look up <tt>/etc/services</tt> to determine which port number <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> should monitor for this service.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Socket type</span>: This specifies the type of socket used by this service—for example, <tt>stream</tt> or <tt>dgram</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Protocol</span>:
 This specifies the protocol to be used by this socket. This field can 
contain any of the Internet protocols listed in the file <tt>/etc/protocols</tt> (documented in the <span class="docEmphasis">protocols(5)</span> manual page), but almost every service specifies either <tt>tcp</tt> (for TCP) or <tt>udp</tt> (for UDP).</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Flags</span>: This field contains either <tt>wait</tt> or <tt>nowait</tt>. This field specifies whether or not the server execed by <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span>
 (temporarily) takes over management of the socket for this service. If 
the execed server manages the socket, then this field is specified as <tt>wait</tt>. This causes <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> to remove this socket from the file descriptor set that it monitors using <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> until the execed server exits (<span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> detects this via a handler for <tt>SIGCHLD</tt>). We say some more about this field below.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Login name</span>: This field consists of a username from <tt>/etc/passwd</tt>, optionally followed by a period (<tt>.</tt>) and a group name from <tt>/etc/group</tt>. These determine the user and group IDs under which the execed server is run. (Since <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> runs with an effective user ID of <span class="docEmphasis">root</span>, its children are also privileged and can thus use calls to <span class="docEmphasis">setuid()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">setgid()</span> to change process credentials if desired.)</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Server program</span>: This specifies the pathname of the server program to be execed.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Server program arguments</span>:
 This field specifies one or more arguments, separated by white space, 
to be used as the argument list when execing the server program. The 
first of these corresponds to <span class="docEmphasis">argv[0]</span> in the execed program and is thus usually the same as the basename part of the <span class="docEmphasis">server program</span> name. The next argument corresponds to <span class="docEmphasis">argv[1]</span>, and so on.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In the example lines shown in Example 60-5 for the <span class="docEmphasis">ftp</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">telnet</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">login</span>
 services, we see the server program and arguments are set up 
differently than just described. All three of these services cause <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> to invoke the same program, <span class="docEmphasis">tcpd(8)</span>
 (the TCP daemon wrapper), which performs some logging and 
access-control checks before in turn execing the appropriate program, 
based on the value specified as the first server program argument (which
 is available to <span class="docEmphasis">tcpd</span> via <span class="docEmphasis">argv[0]</span>). Further information about <span class="docEmphasis">tcpd</span> can be found in the <span class="docEmphasis">tcpd(8)</span> manual page and in [Mann &amp; Mitchell, 2003].</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Stream socket (TCP) servers invoked by <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> are normally designed to handle just a single client connection and then terminate, leaving <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> with the job of listening for further connections. For such servers, <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> should be specified as <tt>nowait</tt>. (If, instead, the execed server is to accept connections, then <tt>wait</tt> should be specified, in which case <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> does not accept the connection, but instead passes the file descriptor for the <span class="docEmphasis">listening</span> socket to the execed server as descriptor 0.)</p><p class="docText">For most UDP servers, the <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> field should be specified as <tt>wait</tt>. A UDP server invoked by <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span>
 is normally designed to read and process all outstanding datagrams on 
the socket and then terminate. (This usually requires some sort of 
timeout when reading the socket, so that the server terminates when no 
new datagrams arrive within a specified interval.) By specifying <tt>wait</tt>, we prevent the <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> daemon from simultaneously trying to <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> on the socket, which would have the unintended consequence that <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> would race the UDP server to check for datagrams and, if it won the race, start another instance of the UDP server.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Because the operation of <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span>
 and the format of its configuration file are not specified by SUSv3, 
there are some (generally small) variations in the values that can be 
specified in the fields of <tt>/etc/inetd.conf</tt>. Most versions of <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> provide at least the syntax that we describe in the main text. For further details, see the <span class="docEmphasis">inetd.conf(8)</span> manual page.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">As an efficiency measure, <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> implements a few simple services itself, instead of execing separate servers to perform the task. The UDP and TCP <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span> services are examples of services that <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> implements. For such services, the <span class="docEmphasis">server program</span> field of the corresponding <tt>/etc/inetd.conf</tt> record is specified as <tt>internal</tt>, and the <span class="docEmphasis">server program arguments</span> are omitted. (In the example lines in Example 60-5, we saw that the <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span> service entries were commented out. To enable the <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span> service, we need to remove the <tt>#</tt> character at the start of these lines.)</p><p class="docText">Whenever we change the <tt>/etc/inetd.conf</tt> file, we need to send a <tt>SIGHUP</tt> signal to <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> to request it to reread the file:</p><pre># <b>killall -HUP inetd</b></pre><br/>
<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EGGHM">60.5.1.3. Example: invoking a TCP <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span> service via <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span></h5><p class="docText">We noted earlier that <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span>
 simplifies the programming of servers, especially concurrent (usually 
TCP) servers. It does this by carrying out the following steps on behalf
 of the servers it invokes:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Perform all socket-related initialization, calling <span class="docEmphasis">socket()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">bind()</span>, and (for TCP servers) <span class="docEmphasis">listen()</span>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">For a TCP service, perform an <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span> for the new connection.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Create
 a new process to handle the incoming UDP datagram or TCP connection. 
The process is automatically set up as a daemon. The <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> program handles all details of process creation via <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> and the reaping of dead children via a handler for <tt>SIGCHLD</tt>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Duplicate
 the file descriptor of the UDP socket or the connected TCP socket on 
file descriptors 0, 1, and 2, and close all other file descriptors 
(since they are unused in the execed server).</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Exec the server program.</p></div></li></ol></div><p class="docText">(In the description of the above steps, we assume the usual cases that the <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> field of the service entry in <tt>/etc/inetd.conf</tt> is specified as <tt>nowait</tt> for TCP services and <tt>wait</tt> for UDP services.)</p><p class="docText">As an example of how <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> simplifies the programming of a TCP service, in Example 60-6, we show the <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span>-invoked equivalent of the TCP <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span> server from Example 60-4. Since <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span>
 performs all of the above steps, all that remains of the server is the 
code executed by the child process to handle the client request, which 
can be read from file descriptor 0 (<tt>STDIN_FILENO</tt>).</p><p class="docText">If the server resides in the directory <tt>/bin</tt> (for example), then we would need to create the following entry in <tt>/etc/inetd.conf</tt> in order to have <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> invoke the server:</p><pre>echo stream tcp nowait root /bin/is_echo_inetd_sv is_echo_inetd_sv</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EMJHM">Example 60-6. TCP <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span> server designed to be invoked via <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>sockets/is_echo_inetd_sv.c</b>
#include &lt;syslog.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

#define BUF_SIZE 4096

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    char buf[BUF_SIZE];
    ssize_t numRead;

    while ((numRead = read(STDIN_FILENO, buf, BUF_SIZE)) &gt; 0) {
        if (write(STDOUT_FILENO, buf, numRead) != numRead) {
            syslog(LOG_ERR, "write() failed: %s", strerror(errno));
            exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
        }
    }

    if (numRead == -1) {
        syslog(LOG_ERR, "Error from read(): %s", strerror(errno));
        exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
    }

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>sockets/is_echo_inetd_sv.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
