<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>61.2. The shutdown() System Call</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">61.2. The <span class="docEmphasis">shutdown()</span> System Call</h3><p class="docText">Calling <span class="docEmphasis">close()</span>
 on a socket closes both halves of the bidirectional communication 
channel. Sometimes, it is useful to close one half of the connection, so
 that data can be transmitted in just one direction through the socket. 
The <span class="docEmphasis">shutdown()</span> system call provides this functionality.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/socket.h&gt;

int <b>shutdown</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">sockfd</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">how</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">shutdown()</span> system call closes one or both channels of the socket <span class="docEmphasis">sockfd</span>, depending on the value of <span class="docEmphasis">how</span>, which is specified as one of the following:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SHUT_RD</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Close
 the reading half of the connection. Subsequent reads will return 
end-of-file (0). Data can still be written to the socket. After a <tt>SHUT_RD</tt> on a UNIX domain stream socket, the peer application receives a <tt>SIGPIPE</tt> signal and the <tt>EPIPE</tt> error if it makes further attempts to write to the peer socket. As discussed in Section 61.6.6, <tt>SHUT_RD</tt> can’t be used meaningfully for TCP sockets.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SHUT_WR</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Close
 the writing half of the connection. Once the peer application has read 
all outstanding data, it will see end-of-file. Subsequent writes to the 
local socket yield the <tt>SIGPIPE</tt> signal and an <tt>EPIPE</tt>
 error. Data written by the peer can still be read from the socket. In 
other words, this operation allows us to signal end-of-file to the peer 
while still being able to read data that the peer sends back to us. The <tt>SHUT_WR</tt> operation is employed by programs such as <span class="docEmphasis">ssh</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">rsh</span> (refer to Section 18.5 of [Stevens, 1994]). The <tt>SHUT_WR</tt> operation is the most common use of <span class="docEmphasis">shutdown()</span>, and is sometimes referred to as a <span class="docEmphasis">socket half-close</span>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">SHUT_RDWR</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Close both the read and the write halves of the connection. This is the same as performing a <tt>SHUT_RD</tt> followed by a <tt>SHUT_WR</tt>.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">Aside from the semantics of the <span class="docEmphasis">how</span> argument, <span class="docEmphasis">shutdown()</span> differs from <span class="docEmphasis">close()</span>
 in another important respect: it closes the socket channel(s) 
regardless of whether there are other file descriptors referring to the 
socket. (In other words, <span class="docEmphasis">shutdown()</span> is performing an operation on the open file description, rather than the file descriptor. See Figure 5-1, in Section 5.1.1.1.) Suppose, for example, that <span class="docEmphasis">sockfd</span>
 refers to a connected stream socket. If we make the following calls, 
then the connection remains open, and we can still perform I/O on the 
connection via the file descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">fd2</span>:</p><pre>fd2 = dup(sockfd);
close(sockfd);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">However, if we make the 
following sequence of calls, then both channels of the connection are 
closed, and I/O can no longer be performed via <span class="docEmphasis">fd2</span>:</p><pre>fd2 = dup(sockfd);
shutdown(sockfd, SHUT_RDWR);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">A similar scenario holds if a file descriptor for a socket is duplicated during a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>. If, after the <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, one process does a <tt>SHUT_RDWR</tt> on its copy of the descriptor, then the other process also can no longer perform I/O on its descriptor.</p><p class="docText">Note that <span class="docEmphasis">shutdown()</span> doesn’t close the file descriptor, even if <span class="docEmphasis">how</span> is specified as <tt>SHUT_RDWR</tt>. To close the file descriptor, we must additionally call <span class="docEmphasis">close()</span>.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETEHM">61.2.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EXEHM">61.2.1.1. Example program</h5><p class="docText">Example 61-2 demonstrates the use of the <span class="docEmphasis">shutdown()</span> <tt>SHUT_WR</tt> operation. This program is a TCP client for the <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span> service. (We presented a TCP server for the <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span>
 service in Section 60.3.) To shorten the implementation, we make use of
 functions in the Internet domain sockets library shown in Section 59.12.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In some Linux distributions, the <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span> service is not enabled by default, and therefore we must enable it before running the program in Example 61-2. Typically, this service is implemented internally by the <span class="docEmphasis">inetd(8)</span> daemon (Section 60.5), and, to enable the <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span> service, we must edit the file <tt>/etc/inetd.conf</tt> to uncomment the two lines corresponding to the UDP and TCP <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span> services (see Example 60-5, in Section 60.5.1.2), and then send a <tt>SIGHUP</tt> signal to the <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span> daemon.</p><p class="docText">Many distributions supply the more modern <span class="docEmphasis">xinetd(8)</span> instead of <span class="docEmphasis">inetd(8)</span>. Consult the <span class="docEmphasis">xinetd</span> documentation for information about how to make the equivalent changes under <span class="docEmphasis">xinetd</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">As its single command-line argument, the program takes the name of the host on which the <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span> server is running. The client performs a <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, yielding parent and child processes.</p><p class="docText">The client parent writes the contents of standard input to the socket, so that it can be read by the <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span> server. When the parent detects end-of-file on standard input, it uses <span class="docEmphasis">shutdown()</span> to close the writing half of its socket. This causes the <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span>
 server to see end-of-file, at which point it closes its socket (which 
causes the client child in turn to see end-of-file). The parent then 
terminates.</p><p class="docText">The client child reads the <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span>
 server’s response from the socket and echoes the response on standard 
output. The child terminates when it sees end-of-file on the socket.</p><p class="docText">The following shows an example of what we see when running this program:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>cat &gt; tell-tale-heart.txt </b>                           <i> Create a file for testing</i>
<b>It is impossible to say how the idea entered my brain; </b>
<b>but once conceived, it haunted me day and night. </b>
<i> Type Control-D</i>
$ <b>./is_echo_cl tekapo &lt; tell-tale-heart.txt </b>
It is impossible to say how the idea entered my brain;
but once conceived, it haunted me day and night.

					  </pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EHIHM">Example 61-2. A client for the <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span> service</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>sockets/is_echo_cl.c</b>
#include "inet_sockets.h"
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

#define BUF_SIZE 100

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int sfd;
    ssize_t numRead;
    char buf[BUF_SIZE];

    if (argc != 2 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s host\n", argv[0]);

    sfd = inetConnect(argv[1], "echo", SOCK_STREAM);
    if (sfd == -1)
        errExit("inetConnect");

    switch (fork()) {
    case -1:
        errExit("fork");

    case 0:             /* Child: read server's response, echo on stdout */
        for (;;) {
            numRead = read(sfd, buf, BUF_SIZE);
            if (numRead &lt;= 0)           /* Exit on EOF or error */
                break;
            printf("%.*s", (int) numRead, buf);
        }
        exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);

    default:            /* Parent: write contents of stdin to socket */
        for (;;) {
            numRead = read(STDIN_FILENO, buf, BUF_SIZE);
            if (numRead &lt;= 0)           /* Exit loop on EOF or error */
                break;
            if (write(sfd, buf, numRead) != numRead)
                fatal("write() failed");
        }

        /* Close writing channel, so server sees EOF */

        if (shutdown(sfd, SHUT_WR) == -1)
            errExit("shutdown");
        exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
    }
}
      <b>sockets/is_echo_cl.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
