<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>61.3. Socket-Specific I/O System Calls: recv() and send()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">61.3. Socket-Specific I/O System Calls: <span class="docEmphasis">recv()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">send()</span></h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">recv()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">send()</span>
 system calls perform I/O on connected sockets. They provide 
socket-specific functionality that is not available with the traditional
 <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> system calls.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/socket.h&gt;

ssize_t <b>recv</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">sockfd</span>, void *<span class="docEmphasis">buffer</span>, size_t <span class="docEmphasis">length</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns number of bytes received, 0 on EOF, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><pre>ssize_t <b>send</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">sockfd</span>, const void *<span class="docEmphasis">buffer</span>, size_t <span class="docEmphasis">length</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns number of bytes sent, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The return value and the first three arguments to <span class="docEmphasis">recv()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">send()</span> are the same as for <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>. The last argument, <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>, is a bit mask that modifies the behavior of the I/O operation. For <span class="docEmphasis">recv()</span>, the bits that may be ORed in <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> include the following:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MSG_DONTWAIT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Perform a nonblocking <span class="docEmphasis">recv()</span>. If no data is available, then instead of blocking, return immediately with the error <tt>EAGAIN</tt>. We can obtain the same behavior by using <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> to set nonblocking mode (<tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt>) on the socket, with the difference that <tt>MSG_DONTWAIT</tt> allows us to control nonblocking behavior on a per-call basis.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MSG_OOB</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Receive out-of-band data on the socket. We briefly describe this feature in Section 61.13.1.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MSG_PEEK</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Retrieve
 a copy of the requested bytes from the socket buffer, but don’t 
actually remove them from the buffer. The data can later be reread by 
another <span class="docEmphasis">recv()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> call.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MSG_WAITALL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Normally, a <span class="docEmphasis">recv()</span> call returns the lesser of the number of bytes requested (<span class="docEmphasis">length</span>) and the number of bytes actually available in the socket. Specifying the <tt>MSG_WAITALL</tt> flag causes the system call to block until <span class="docEmphasis">length</span>
 bytes have been received. However, even when this flag is specified, 
the call may return fewer bytes than requested if: (a) a signal is 
caught; (b) the peer on a stream socket terminated the connection; (c) 
an out-of-band data byte (Section 61.13.1) was encountered; (d) the received message from a datagram socket is less than <span class="docEmphasis">length</span> bytes; or (e) an error occurs on the socket. (The <tt>MSG_WAITALL</tt> flag can replace the <span class="docEmphasis">readn()</span> function that we show in Example 61-1, with the difference that our <span class="docEmphasis">readn()</span> function does restart itself if interrupted by a signal handler.)</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">All of the above flags are specified in SUSv3, except for <tt>MSG_DONTWAIT</tt>, which is nevertheless available on some other UNIX implementations. The <tt>MSG_WAITALL</tt> flag was a later addition to the sockets API, and is not present in some older implementations.</p><p class="docText">For <span class="docEmphasis">send()</span>, the bits that may be ORed in <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> include the following:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MSG_DONTWAIT</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Perform a nonblocking <span class="docEmphasis">send()</span>.
 If the data can’t be immediately transferred (because the socket send 
buffer is full), then, instead of blocking, fail with the error <tt>EAGAIN</tt>. As with <span class="docEmphasis">recv()</span>, the same effect can be achieved by setting the <tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt> flag for the socket.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MSG_MORE</span></span> (since Linux 2.4.4)</span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">This flag is used with TCP sockets to achieve the same effect as the <tt>TCP_CORK</tt> socket option (Section 61.4),
 with the difference that it provides corking of data on a per-call 
basis. Since Linux 2.6, this flag can also be used with datagram 
sockets, where it has a different meaning. Data transmitted in 
successive <span class="docEmphasis">send()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">sendto()</span> calls specifying <tt>MSG_MORE</tt>
 is packaged into a single datagram that is transmitted only when a 
further call is made that does not specify this flag. (Linux also 
provides an analogous <tt>UDP_CORK</tt> socket option that causes data from successive <span class="docEmphasis">send()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">sendto()</span> calls to be accumulated into a single datagram that is transmitted when <tt>UDP_CORK</tt> is disabled.) The <tt>MSG_MORE</tt> flag has no effect for UNIX domain sockets.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MSG_NOSIGNAL</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">When sending data on a connected stream socket, don’t generate a <tt>SIGPIPE</tt> signal if the other end of the connection has been closed. Instead, the <span class="docEmphasis">send()</span> call fails with the error <tt>EPIPE</tt>. This is the same behavior as can be obtained by ignoring the <tt>SIGPIPE</tt> signal, with the difference that the <tt>MSG_NOSIGNAL</tt> flag controls the behavior on a per-call basis.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">MSG_OOB</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Send out-of-band data on a stream socket. Refer to Section 61.13.1.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">Of the above flags, only <tt>MSG_OOB</tt> is specified by SUSv3. SUSv4 adds a specification for <tt>MSG_NOSIGNAL. MSG_DONTWAIT</tt> is not standardized, but appears on a few other UNIX implementations. <tt>MSG_MORE</tt> is Linux-specific. The <span class="docEmphasis">send(2)</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">recv(2)</span> manual pages describe further flags that we don’t cover here.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
