<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>61.5. Retrieving Socket Addresses</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">61.5. Retrieving Socket Addresses</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getsockname()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getpeername()</span>
 system calls return, respectively, the local address to which a socket 
is bound and the address of the peer socket to which the local socket is
 connected.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/socket.h&gt;

int <b>getsockname</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">sockfd</span>, struct sockaddr *<span class="docEmphasis">addr</span>, socklen_t *<span class="docEmphasis">addrlen</span>);
int <b>getpeername</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">sockfd</span>, struct sockaddr *<span class="docEmphasis">addr</span>, socklen_t *<span class="docEmphasis">addrlen</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Both return 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">For both calls, <span class="docEmphasis">sockfd</span> is a file descriptor referring to a socket, and <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span>
 is a pointer to a suitably sized buffer that is used to return a 
structure containing the socket address. The size and type of this 
structure depend on the socket domain. The <span class="docEmphasis">addrlen</span> argument is a value-result argument. Before the call, it should be initialized to the length of the buffer pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">addr</span>; on return, it contains the number of bytes actually written to this buffer.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getsockname()</span>
 function returns a socket’s address family and the address to which a 
socket is bound. This is useful if the socket was bound by another 
program (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">inetd(8)</span>) and the socket file descriptor was then preserved across an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>.</p><p class="docText">Calling <span class="docEmphasis">getsockname()</span>
 is also useful if we want to determine the ephemeral port number that 
the kernel assigned to a socket when performing an implicit bind of an 
Internet domain socket. The kernel performs an implicit bind in the 
following circumstances:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">after a <span class="docEmphasis">connect()</span> or a <span class="docEmphasis">listen()</span> call on a TCP socket that has not previously been bound to an address by <span class="docEmphasis">bind()</span>;</p></li><li><p class="docList">on the first <span class="docEmphasis">sendto()</span> on a UDP socket that had not previously been bound to an address; or</p></li><li><p class="docList">after a <span class="docEmphasis">bind()</span> call where the port number (<span class="docEmphasis">sin_port</span>) was specified as 0. In this case, the <span class="docEmphasis">bind()</span> specifies the IP address for the socket, but the kernel selects an ephemeral port number.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getpeername()</span>
 system call returns the address of the peer socket on a stream socket 
connection. This is useful primarily with TCP sockets, if the server 
wants to find out the address of the client that has made a connection. 
This information could also be obtained when the <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span> call is performed; however, if the server was execed by the program that did the <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span> (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span>), then it inherits the socket file descriptor, but the address information returned by <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span> is no longer available.</p><p class="docText">Example 61-3 demonstrates the use of <span class="docEmphasis">getsockname()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getpeername()</span>. This program employs the functions that we defined in Example 59-9 (in Section 59.12), and performs the following steps:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Use our <span class="docEmphasis">inetListen()</span> function to create a listening socket, <span class="docEmphasis">listenFd</span>,
 bound to the wildcard IP address and the port specified in the 
program’s sole command-line argument. (The port can be specified 
numerically or as a service name.) The <span class="docEmphasis">len</span> argument returns the length of the address structure for this socket’s domain. This value is passed in a later call to <span class="docEmphasis">malloc()</span> to allocate a buffer that is used to return a socket address from calls to <span class="docEmphasis">getsockname()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getpeername()</span>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Use our <span class="docEmphasis">inetConnect()</span> function to create a second socket, <span class="docEmphasis">connFd</span>, which is used to send a connection request to the socket created in step 1.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Call <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span> on the listening socket in order to create a third socket, <span class="docEmphasis">acceptFd</span>, that is connected to the socket created in the previous step.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Use calls to <span class="docEmphasis">getsockname()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getpeername()</span> to obtain the local and peer addresses for the two connected sockets, <span class="docEmphasis">connFd</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">acceptFd</span>. After each of these calls, the program uses our <span class="docEmphasis">inetAddressStr()</span> function to convert the socket address into printable form.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Sleep for a few seconds so that we can run <span class="docEmphasis">netstat</span> in order to confirm the socket address information. (We describe <span class="docEmphasis">netstat</span> in Section 61.7.)</p></div></li></ol></div><p class="docText">The following shell session log shows an example run of this program:</p><pre>$ <b>./socknames 55555 &amp;</b>
getsockname(connFd):   (localhost, 32835)
getsockname(acceptFd): (localhost, 55555)
getpeername(connFd):   (localhost, 55555)
getpeername(acceptFd): (localhost, 32835)
[1] 8171
$ <b>netstat -a | egrep '(Address|55555)'</b>
Proto Recv-Q Send-Q Local Address    Foreign Address  State
tcp        0      0 *:55555          *:*              LISTEN
tcp        0      0 localhost:32835  localhost:55555  ESTABLISHED
tcp        0      0 localhost:55555  localhost:32835  ESTABLISHED</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">From the above output, we can see that the connected socket (<span class="docEmphasis">connFd</span>) was bound to the ephemeral port 32835. The <span class="docEmphasis">netstat</span>
 command shows us information about all three sockets created by the 
program, and allows us to confirm the port information for the two 
connected sockets, which are in the ESTABLISHED state (described in Section 61.6.3).</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EEJHM">Example 61-3. Using <span class="docEmphasis">getsockname()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getpeername()</span></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>sockets/socknames.c</b>
#include "inet_sockets.h"               /* Declares our socket functions */
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int listenFd, acceptFd, connFd;
    socklen_t len;                      /* Size of socket address buffer */
    void *addr;                         /* Buffer for socket address */
    char addrStr[IS_ADDR_STR_LEN];

    if (argc != 2 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s service\n", argv[0]);

    listenFd = inetListen(argv[1], 5, &amp;len);
    if (listenFd == -1)
        errExit("inetListen");

    connFd = inetConnect(NULL, argv[1], SOCK_STREAM);
    if (connFd == -1)
        errExit("inetConnect");

    acceptFd = accept(listenFd, NULL, NULL);
    if (acceptFd == -1)
        errExit("accept");

    addr = malloc(len);
    if (addr == NULL)
        errExit("malloc");

    if (getsockname(connFd, addr, &amp;len) == -1)
        errExit("getsockname");
    printf("getsockname(connFd):   %s\n",
            inetAddressStr(addr, len, addrStr, IS_ADDR_STR_LEN));
    if (getsockname(acceptFd, addr, &amp;len) == -1)
        errExit("getsockname");
    printf("getsockname(acceptFd): %s\n",
            inetAddressStr(addr, len, addrStr, IS_ADDR_STR_LEN));

    if (getpeername(connFd, addr, &amp;len) == -1)
        errExit("getpeername");
    printf("getpeername(connFd):   %s\n",
            inetAddressStr(addr, len, addrStr, IS_ADDR_STR_LEN));
    if (getpeername(acceptFd, addr, &amp;len) == -1)
        errExit("getpeername");
    printf("getpeername(acceptFd): %s\n",
            inetAddressStr(addr, len, addrStr, IS_ADDR_STR_LEN));

    sleep(30);                          /* Give us time to run netstat(8) */
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>sockets/socknames.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
