<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>61.7. Monitoring Sockets: netstat</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">61.7. Monitoring Sockets: <span class="docEmphasis">netstat</span></h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">netstat</span>
 program displays the state of Internet and UNIX domain sockets on a 
system. It is a useful debugging tool when writing socket applications. 
Most UNIX implementations provide a version of <span class="docEmphasis">netstat</span>, although there is some variation in the syntax of its command-line arguments across implementations.</p><p class="docText">By default, when executed with no command-line options, <span class="docEmphasis">netstat</span>
 displays information for connected sockets in both the UNIX and 
Internet domains. We can use a number of command-line options to change 
the information displayed. Some of these options are listed in Table 61-1.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 61-1. Options for the <span class="docEmphasis">netstat</span> command</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Option</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>-a</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Display information about all sockets, including listening sockets</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>-e</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Display extended information (includes user ID of socket owner)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>-c</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Redisplay socket information continuously (each second)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>-l</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Display information only about listening sockets</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>-n</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Display IP addresses, port numbers, and usernames in numerical form</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>-p</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Show the process ID and name of program to which socket belongs</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>--inet</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Display information for Internet domain sockets</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>--tcp</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Display information for Internet domain TCP (stream) sockets</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>--udp</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Display information for Internet domain UDP (datagram) sockets</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>--unix</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Display information for UNIX domain sockets</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">Here is an abridged example of the output that we see when using <span class="docEmphasis">netstat</span> to list all Internet domain sockets on the system:</p><pre>$ <b>netstat -a --inet</b>
Active Internet connections (servers and established)
Proto Recv-Q Send-Q Local Address    Foreign Address  State
tcp        0      0 *:50000          *:*              LISTEN
tcp        0      0 *:55000          *:*              LISTEN
tcp        0      0 localhost:smtp   *:*              LISTEN
tcp        0      0 localhost:32776  localhost:58000  TIME_WAIT
tcp    34767      0 localhost:55000  localhost:32773  ESTABLISHED
tcp        0 115680 localhost:32773  localhost:55000  ESTABLISHED
udp        0      0 localhost:61000  localhost:60000  ESTABLISHED
udp      684      0 *:60000          *:*</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">For each Internet domain socket, we see the following information:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><tt>Proto</tt>: This is the socket protocol—for example, <tt>tcp</tt> or <tt>udp</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>Recv-Q</tt>:
 This is the number of bytes in the socket receive buffer that are as 
yet unread by the local application. For UDP sockets, this field counts 
not just data, but also bytes in UDP headers and other metadata.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>Send-Q</tt>: This is the number of bytes queued for transmission in the socket send buffer. As with the <tt>Recv-Q</tt> field, for UDP sockets, this field includes bytes in UDP headers and other metadata.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>Local Address</tt>: This is the address to which the socket is bound, expressed in the form <span class="docEmphasis">host-IP-address:port</span>.
 By default, both components of the address are displayed as names, 
unless the numeric values can’t be resolved to corresponding host and 
service names. An asterisk (<tt>*</tt>) in the host part of the address means the wildcard IP address.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>Foreign Address</tt>: This is the address of the peer socket to which this socket is bound. The string <tt>*:*</tt> indicates no peer address.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>State</tt>: This is the current state of the socket. For a TCP socket, this state is one of those described in Section 61.6.3.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">For further details, see the <span class="docEmphasis">netstat(8)</span> manual page.</p><p class="docText">Various Linux-specific files in the directory <tt>/proc/net</tt> allow a program to read much of the same information that is displayed by <span class="docEmphasis">netstat</span>. These files are named <tt>tcp</tt>, <tt>udp</tt>, <tt>tcp6</tt>, <tt>udp6</tt>, and <tt>unix</tt>, with the obvious purposes. For further details, see the <span class="docEmphasis">proc(5)</span> manual page.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
