<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>61.8. Using tcpdump to Monitor TCP Traffic</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">61.8. Using <span class="docEmphasis">tcpdump</span> to Monitor TCP Traffic</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">tcpdump</span>
 program is a useful debugging tool that allows the superuser to monitor
 the Internet traffic on a live network, generating a real-time textual 
equivalent of diagrams such as Figure 61-3. Despite its name, <span class="docEmphasis">tcpdump</span>
 can be used to display traffic for all kinds of network packets (e.g., 
TCP segments, UDP datagrams, and ICMP packets). For each network packet,
 <span class="docEmphasis">tcpdump</span> displays
 information such as timestamps, the source and destination IP 
addresses, and further protocol-specific details. It is possible to 
select the packets to be monitored by protocol type, source and 
destination IP address and port number, and a range of other criteria. 
Full details are provided in the <span class="docEmphasis">tcpdump</span> manual page.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">wireshark</span> (formerly <span class="docEmphasis">ethereal</span>; http://www.wireshark.org) program performs a similar task to <span class="docEmphasis">tcpdump</span>, but displays traffic information via a graphical interface.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">For each TCP segment, <span class="docEmphasis">tcpdump</span> displays a line of the following form:</p><pre><span class="docEmphasis">src</span> &gt; <span class="docEmphasis">dst</span>: <span class="docEmphasis">flags data-seqno ack window urg</span> &lt;<span class="docEmphasis">options</span>&gt;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">These fields have the following meanings:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">src</span>: This is the source IP address and port.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">dst</span>: This is the destination IP address and port.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>:
 This field contains zero or more of the following letters, each of 
which corresponds to one of the TCP control bits described in Section 61.6.1: S (SYN), F (FIN), P (PSH), R (RST), E (ECE), and C (CWR).</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">data-seqno</span>: This is the range of the sequence-number space covered by the bytes in this packet.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">By
 default, the sequence-number range is displayed relative to the first 
byte monitored for this direction of the data stream. The <span class="docEmphasis">tcpdump -S</span> option causes sequence numbers to be displayed in absolute format.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">ack</span>: This is a string of the form “<tt>ack</tt> <span class="docEmphasis">num</span>” indicating the sequence number of the next byte expected from the other direction on this connection.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">window</span>: This is a string of the form “<tt>win</tt> <span class="docEmphasis">num</span>”
 indicating the number of bytes of receive buffer space available for 
transmission in the opposite direction on this connection.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">urg</span>: This is a string of the form “<tt>urg</tt> <span class="docEmphasis">num</span>” indicating that this segment contains urgent data at the specified offset within the segment.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">options</span>: This string describes any TCP options contained in the segment.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">src</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">dst</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> fields always appear. The remaining fields are displayed only if appropriate.</p><p class="docText">The shell session below shows how <span class="docEmphasis">tcpdump</span> can be used to monitor the traffic between a client (running on the host <tt>pukaki</tt>) and a server (running on <tt>tekapo</tt>). In this shell session, we use two <span class="docEmphasis">tcpdump</span> options that make the output less verbose. The <span class="docEmphasis">-t</span> option suppresses the display of timestamp information. The <span class="docEmphasis">-N</span>
 option causes hostnames to be displayed without a qualifying domain 
name. Furthermore, for brevity, and because we don’t describe the 
details of TCP options, we have removed the <span class="docEmphasis">options</span> fields from the lines of <span class="docEmphasis">tcpdump</span> output.</p><p class="docText">The server operates on port 55555, so our <span class="docEmphasis">tcpdump</span> command selects traffic for that port. The output shows the three segments exchanged during connection establishment:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>tcpdump -t -N 'port 55555'</b>
IP pukaki.60391 &gt; tekapo.55555: S 3412991013:3412991013(0) win 5840
IP tekapo.55555 &gt; pukaki.60391: S 1149562427:1149562427(0) ack 3412991014 win 5792
IP pukaki.60391 &gt; tekapo.55555: . ack 1 win 5840

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">These three segments are the SYN, SYN/ACK, and ACK segments exchanged for the three-way handshake (see Figure 61-5).</p><p class="docText">In
 the following output, the client sends the server two messages, 
containing 16 and 32 bytes, respectively, and the server responds in 
each case with a 4-byte message:</p><pre>IP pukaki.60391 &gt; tekapo.55555: P 1:17(16) ack 1 win 5840
IP tekapo.55555 &gt; pukaki.60391: . ack 17 win 1448
IP tekapo.55555 &gt; pukaki.60391: P 1:5(4) ack 17 win 1448
IP pukaki.60391 &gt; tekapo.55555: . ack 5 win 5840
IP pukaki.60391 &gt; tekapo.55555: P 17:49(32) ack 5 win 5840
IP tekapo.55555 &gt; pukaki.60391: . ack 49 win 1448
IP tekapo.55555 &gt; pukaki.60391: P 5:9(4) ack 49 win 1448
IP pukaki.60391 &gt; tekapo.55555: . ack 9 win 5840</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">For each of the data segments, we see an ACK sent in the opposite direction.</p><p class="docText">Lastly,
 we show the segments exchanged during connection termination (first, 
the client closes its end of the connection, and then the server closes 
the other end):</p><pre>IP pukaki.60391 &gt; tekapo.55555: F 49:49(0) ack 9 win 5840
IP tekapo.55555 &gt; pukaki.60391: . ack 50 win 1448
IP tekapo.55555 &gt; pukaki.60391: F 9:9(0) ack 50 win 1448
IP pukaki.60391 &gt; tekapo.55555: . ack 10 win 5840</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The above output shows the four segments exchanged during connection termination (see Figure 61-6).</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
