<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>61.9. Socket Options</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">61.9. Socket Options</h3><p class="docText">Socket
 options affect various features of the operation of a socket. In this 
book, we describe just a couple of the many socket options that are 
available. An extensive discussion covering most standard socket options
 is provided in [Stevens et al., 2004]. See the <span class="docEmphasis">tcp(7)</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">udp(7)</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ip(7)</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">socket(7)</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">unix(7)</span> manual pages for additional Linux-specific details.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">setsockopt()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getsockopt()</span> system calls set and retrieve socket options.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/socket.h&gt;

int <b>getsockopt</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">sockfd</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">level</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">optname</span>, void *<span class="docEmphasis">optval</span>,
               socklen_t *<span class="docEmphasis">optlen</span>);
int <b>setsockopt</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">sockfd</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">level</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">optname</span>, const void *<span class="docEmphasis">optval</span>,
               socklen_t <span class="docEmphasis">optlen</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Both return 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">For both <span class="docEmphasis">setsockopt()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getsockopt()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">sockfd</span> is a file descriptor referring to a socket.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">level</span>
 argument specifies the protocol to which the socket option applies—for 
example, IP or TCP. For most of the socket options that we describe in 
this book, <span class="docEmphasis">level</span> is set to <tt>SOL_SOCKET</tt>, which indicates an option that applies at the sockets API level.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">optname</span> argument identifies the option whose value we wish to set or retrieve. The <span class="docEmphasis">optval</span>
 argument is a pointer to a buffer used to specify or return the option 
value; this argument is a pointer to an integer or a structure, 
depending on the option.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">optlen</span> argument specifies the size (in bytes) of the buffer pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">optval</span>. For <span class="docEmphasis">setsockopt()</span>, this argument is passed by value. For <span class="docEmphasis">getsockopt()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">optlen</span> is a value-result argument. Before the call, we initialize it to the size of the buffer pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">optval</span>; upon return, it is set to the number of bytes actually written to that buffer.</p><p class="docText">As detailed in Section 61.11, the socket file descriptor returned by a call to <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span> inherits the values of settable socket options from the listening socket.</p><p class="docText">Socket options are associated with an open file description (refer to Figure 5-2, in Section 5.4). This means that file descriptors duplicated as a consequence of <span class="docEmphasis">dup()</span> (or similar) or <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> share the same set of socket options.</p><p class="docText">A simple example of a socket option is <tt>SO_TYPE</tt>, which can be used to find out the type of a socket, as follows:</p><pre>int optval;
socklen_t optlen;

optlen = sizeof(optval);
if (getsockopt(sfd, SOL_SOCKET, SO_TYPE, &amp;optval, &amp;optlen) == -1)
    errExit("getsockopt");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">After this call, <span class="docEmphasis">optval</span> contains the socket type—for example, <tt>SOCK_STREAM</tt> or <tt>SOCK_DGRAM</tt>. Using this call can be useful in a program that inherited a socket file descriptor across an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>—for example, a program execed by <span class="docEmphasis">inetd</span>—since that program may not know which type of socket it inherited.</p><p class="docText"><tt>SO_TYPE</tt> is an example of a read-only socket option. It is not possible to use <span class="docEmphasis">setsockopt()</span> to change a socket’s type.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
