<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>61.10. The SO_REUSEADDR Socket Option</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">61.10. The <span class="docEmphasis">SO_REUSEADDR</span> Socket Option</h3><p class="docText">The <tt>SO_REUSEADDR</tt> socket option serves a number of purposes (see Chapter 7 of [Stevens et al., 2004] for details). We’ll concern ourselves with only one common use: to avoid the <tt>EADDRINUSE</tt>
 (“Address already in use”) error when a TCP server is restarted and 
tries to bind a socket to a port that currently has an associated TCP. 
There are two scenarios in which this usually occurs:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">A previous invocation of the server that was connected to a client performed an active close, either by calling <span class="docEmphasis">close()</span>,
 or by crashing (e.g., it was killed by a signal). This leaves a TCP 
endpoint that remains in the TIME_WAIT state until the 2MSL timeout 
expires.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A 
previous invocation of the server created a child process to handle a 
connection to a client. Later, the server terminated, while the child 
continues to serve the client, and thus maintain a TCP endpoint using 
the server’s well-known port.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">In
 both of these scenarios, the outstanding TCP endpoint is unable to 
accept new connections. Nevertheless, in both cases, by default, most 
TCP implementations prevent a new listening socket from being bound to 
the server’s well-known port.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <tt>EADDRINUSE</tt>
 error doesn’t usually occur with clients, since they typically use an 
ephemeral port that won’t be one of those ports currently in the 
TIME_WAIT state. However, if a client binds to a specific port number, 
then it also can encounter this error.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">To understand the operation of the <tt>SO_REUSEADDR</tt> socket option, it can help to return to our earlier telephone analogy for stream sockets (Section 56.5). Like a telephone call (we ignore the notion of conference calls), a TCP socket connection is identifiable by the <span class="docEmphasis">combination</span> of a pair of connected endpoints. The operation of <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span>
 is analogous to the task performed by a telephone operator on an 
internal company switchboard (“a server”). When an external telephone 
call arrives, the operator transfers it to some internal telephone (“a 
new socket”) within the organization. From an outside perspective, there
 is no way of identifying that internal telephone. When multiple 
external calls are being handled by the switchboard, the only way of 
distinguishing them is via the combination of the external caller’s 
number and the switchboard number. (The latter is necessary when we 
consider that there will be multiple company switchboards within the 
telephone network as a whole.) Analogously, each time we accept a socket
 connection on a listening socket, a new socket is created. All of these
 sockets are associated with the same local address as the listening 
socket. The only way of distinguishing them is via their connections to 
different peer sockets.</p><p class="docText">In other words, a connected TCP socket is identified by a 4-tuple (i.e., a combination of four values) of the following form:</p><pre>{ local-IP-address, local-port, foreign-IP-address, foreign-port }</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The TCP specification 
requires that each such tuple be unique; that is, only one corresponding
 connection incarnation (“telephone call”) can exist. The problem is 
that most implementations (including Linux) enforce a stricter 
constraint: a local port can’t be reused (i.e., specified in a call to <span class="docEmphasis">bind()</span>)
 if any TCP connection incarnation with a matching local port exists on 
the host. This rule is enforced even when the TCP could not accept new 
connections, as in the scenarios described at the start of this section.</p><p class="docText">Enabling the <tt>SO_REUSEADDR</tt>
 socket option relaxes this constraint, bringing it closer to the TCP 
requirement. By default, this option has the value 0, meaning that it is
 disabled. We enable the option by giving it a nonzero value before 
binding a socket, as shown in Example 61-4.</p><p class="docText">Setting the <tt>SO_REUSEADDR</tt>
 option means that we can bind a socket to a local port even if another 
TCP is bound to the same port in either of the scenarios described at 
the start of this section. Most TCP servers should enable this option. 
We have already seen some examples of the use of this option in Example 59-6 (page 1221) and Example 59-9 (page 1228).</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EENHM">Example 61-4. Setting the <tt>SO_REUSEADDR</tt> socket option</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre>int sockfd, optval;

    sockfd = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM, 0);
    if (sockfd == -1)
        errExit("socket");

    optval = 1;
    if (setsockopt(sockfd, SOL_SOCKET, SO_REUSEADDR, &amp;optval,
            sizeof(optval)) == -1)
        errExit("socket");

    if (bind(sockfd, &amp;addr, addrlen) == -1)
        errExit("bind");
    if (listen(sockfd, backlog) == -1)
        errExit("listen");</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
