<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>61.11. Inheritance of Flags and Options Across accept()</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">61.11. Inheritance of Flags and Options Across <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span></h3><p class="docText">Various flags and settings can be associated with open file descriptions and file descriptors (Section 5.4). Furthermore, as described in Section 61.9,
 various options can be set for a socket. If these flags and options are
 set on a listening socket, are they inherited by the new socket 
returned by <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span>? We describe the details here.</p><p class="docText">On Linux, the following attributes are not inherited by the new file descriptor returned by <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span>:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The status flags associated with an open file description—the flags that can be altered using the <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> <tt>F_SETFL</tt> operation (Section 5.3). These include flags such as <tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt> and <tt>O_ASYNC</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The file descriptor flags—the flags that can be altered using the <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> <tt>F_SETFD</tt> operation. The only such flag is the close-on-exec flag (<tt>FD_CLOEXEC</tt>, described in Section 27.4).</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> <tt>F_SETOWN</tt> (owner process ID) and <tt>F_SETSIG</tt> (generated signal) file descriptor attributes associated with signal-driven I/O (Section 63.3).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">On the other hand, the new descriptor returned by <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span> inherits a copy of most of the socket options that can be set using <span class="docEmphasis">setsockopt()</span> (Section 61.9).</p><p class="docText">SUSv3 is silent on the details described here, and the inheritance rules for the new connected socket returned by <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span> vary across UNIX implementations. Most notably, on some UNIX implementations, if open file status flags such as <tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt> and <tt>O_ASYNC</tt> are set on a listening socket, then they are inherited by the new socket returned by <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span>. For portability, it may be necessary to explicitly reset these attributes on a socket returned by <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span>.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
