<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>61.12. TCP Versus UDP</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">61.12. TCP Versus UDP</h3><p class="docText">Given
 that TCP provides reliable delivery of data, while UDP does not, an 
obvious question is, “Why use UDP at all?” The answer to this question 
is covered at some length in Chapter 22 of [Stevens et al., 2004]. Here, we summarize some of the points that may lead us to choose UDP over TCP:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">A
 UDP server can receive (and reply to) datagrams from multiple clients, 
without needing to create and terminate a connection for each client 
(i.e., transmission of single messages using UDP has a lower overhead 
than is required when using TCP).</p></li><li><p class="docList">For
 simple request-response communications, UDP can be faster than TCP, 
since it doesn’t require connection establishment and termination. Appendix A of [Stevens, 1996] notes that in the best-case scenario, the time using TCP is</p><pre>2 * RTT + SPT</pre><br/>
<p class="docList">In this formula, RTT is the
 round-trip time (the time required to send a request and receive a 
response), and SPT is the time spent by the server processing the 
request. (On a wide area network, the SPT value may be small compared to
 the RTT.) For UDP, the best-case scenario for a single request-response
 communication is</p><pre>RTT + SPT</pre><br/>
<p class="docList">This is one RTT less than 
the time required for TCP. Since the RTT between hosts separated by 
large (i.e., intercontinental) distances or many intervening routers is 
typically several tenths of a second, this difference can make UDP 
attractive for some types of request-response communication. DNS is a 
good example of an application that uses UDP for this reason—using UDP 
allows name lookup to be performed by transmitting a single packet in 
each direction between servers.</p></li><li><p class="docList">UDP sockets permit broadcasting and multicasting. <span class="docEmphasis">Broadcasting</span> allows a sender to transmit a datagram to the same destination port on all of the hosts connected to a network. <span class="docEmphasis">Multicasting</span> is similar, but allows a datagram to be sent to a specified set of hosts. For further details see Chapter 21 and Chapter 22 of [Stevens et al., 2004].</p></li><li><p class="docList">Certain
 types of applications (e.g., streaming video and audio transmission) 
can function acceptably without the reliability provided by TCP. On the 
other hand, the delay that may occur after TCP tries to recover from a 
lost segment may result in transmission delays that are unacceptably 
long. (A delay in streaming media transmission may be worse than a brief
 loss of the transmission stream.) Therefore, such applications may 
prefer UDP, and adopt application-specific recovery strategies to deal 
with occasional packet loss.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">An
 application that uses UDP, but nevertheless requires reliability, must 
implement reliability features itself. Usually, this requires at least 
sequence numbers, acknowledgements, retransmission of lost packets, and 
duplicate detection. An example of how to do this is shown in [Stevens 
et al., 2004]. However, if more advanced features such as flow control 
and congestion control are also required, then it is probably best to 
use TCP instead. Trying to implement all of these features on top of UDP
 is complex, and, even when well implemented, the result is unlikely to 
perform better than TCP.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
