<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>61.13. Advanced Features</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">61.13. Advanced Features</h3><p class="docText">UNIX
 and Internet domain sockets have many other features that we have not 
detailed in this book. We summarize a few of these features in this 
section. For full details, see [Stevens et al., 2004].</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EENHM">61.13.1. Out-of-Band Data</h4><p class="docText">Out-of-band
 data is a feature of stream sockets that allows a sender to mark 
transmitted data as high priority; that is, the receiver can obtain 
notification of the availability of out-of-band data without needing to 
read all of the intervening data in the stream. This feature is used in 
programs such as <span class="docEmphasis">telnet, rlogin</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">ftp</span> to make it possible to abort previously transmitted commands. Out-of-band data is sent and received using the <tt>MSG_OOB</tt> flag in calls to <span class="docEmphasis">send()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">recv()</span>. When a socket receives notification of the availability of out-of-band data, the kernel generates the <tt>SIGURG</tt> signal for the socket owner (normally the process using the socket), as set by the <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> <tt>F_SETOWN</tt> operation.</p><p class="docText">When
 employed with TCP sockets, at most 1 byte of data may be marked as 
being out-of-band at any one time. If the sender transmits an additional
 byte of out-of-band data before the receiver has processed the previous
 byte, then the indication for the earlier out-of-band byte is lost.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">TCP’s
 limitation of out-of-band data to a single byte is an artifact of the 
mismatch between the generic out-of-band model of the sockets API and 
its specific implementation using TCP’s <span class="docEmphasis">urgent mode</span>. We touched on TCP’s urgent mode when looking at the format of TCP segments in Section 61.6.1.
 TCP indicates the presence of urgent (out-of-band) data by setting the 
URG bit in the TCP header and setting the urgent pointer field to point 
to the urgent data. However, TCP has no way of indicating the length of 
an urgent data sequence, so the urgent data is considered to consist of a
 single byte.</p><p class="docText">Further information about TCP urgent data can be found in RFC 793.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Under some UNIX implementations, out-of-band data is supported for UNIX domain stream sockets. Linux doesn’t support this.</p><p class="docText">The
 use of out-of-band data is nowadays discouraged, and it may be 
unreliable in some circumstances (see [Gont &amp; Yourtchenko, 2009]). 
An alternative is to maintain a pair of stream sockets for 
communication. One of these is used for normal communication, while the 
other is used for high-priority communication. An application can 
monitor both channels using one of the techniques described in Chapter 63.
 This approach allows multiple bytes of priority data to be transmitted.
 Furthermore, it can be employed with stream sockets in any 
communication domain (e.g., UNIX domain sockets).</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENPHM">61.13.2. The <span class="docEmphasis">sendmsg()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">recvmsg()</span> System Calls</h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sendmsg()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">recvmsg()</span> system calls are the most general purpose of the socket I/O system calls. The <span class="docEmphasis">sendmsg()</span> system call can do everything that is done by <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">send()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">sendto()</span>; the <span class="docEmphasis">recvmsg()</span> system call can do everything that is done by <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">recv()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">recvfrom()</span>. In addition, these calls allow the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">We can perform scatter-gather I/O, as with <span class="docEmphasis">readv()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">writev()</span> (Section 5.7). When we use <span class="docEmphasis">sendmsg()</span> to perform gather output on a datagram socket (or <span class="docEmphasis">writev()</span> on a connected datagram socket), a single datagram is generated. Conversely, <span class="docEmphasis">recvmsg()</span> (and <span class="docEmphasis">readv()</span>)
 can be used to perform scatter input on a datagram socket, dispersing 
the bytes of a single datagram into multiple user-space buffers.</p></li><li><p class="docList">We can transmit messages containing domain-specific <span class="docEmphasis">ancillary data</span>
 (also known as control information). Ancillary data can be passed via 
both stream and datagram sockets. We describe some examples of ancillary
 data below.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Linux 2.6.33 adds a new system call, <span class="docEmphasis">recvmmsg()</span>. This system call is similar to <span class="docEmphasis">recvmsg()</span>,
 but allows multiple datagrams to be received in a single system call. 
This reduces the system-call overhead in applications that deal with 
high levels of network traffic. An analogous <span class="docEmphasis">sendmmsg()</span> system call is likely to be added in a future kernel version.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EFSHM">61.13.3. Passing File Descriptors</h4><p class="docText">Using <span class="docEmphasis">sendmsg()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">recvmsg()</span>,
 we can pass ancillary data containing a file descriptor from one 
process to another process on the same host via a UNIX domain socket. 
Any type of file descriptor can be passed in this manner—for example, 
one obtained from a call to <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">pipe()</span>.
 An example that is more relevant to sockets is that a master server 
could accept a client connection on a TCP listening socket and pass that
 descriptor to one of the members of a pool of server child processes (Section 60.4), which would then respond to the client request.</p><p class="docText">Although
 this technique is commonly referred to as passing a file descriptor, 
what is really being passed between the two processes is a reference to 
the same open file description (Figure 5-2, in Section 5.4).
 The file descriptor number employed in the receiving process would 
typically be different from the number employed in the sender.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">An example of passing file descriptors is provided in the files <tt>scm_rights_send.c</tt> and <tt>scm_rights_recv.c</tt> in the <tt>sockets</tt> subdirectory in the source code distribution for this book.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETUHM">61.13.4. Receiving Sender Credentials</h4><p class="docText">Another
 example of the use of ancillary data is for receiving sender 
credentials via a UNIX domain socket. These credentials consist of the 
user ID, the group ID, and the process ID of the sending process. The 
sender may specify its user and group IDs as the corresponding real, 
effective, or saved set IDs. This allows the receiving process to 
authenticate a sender on the same host. For further details, see the <span class="docEmphasis">socket(7)</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">unix(7)</span> manual pages.</p><p class="docText">Unlike
 passing file credentials, passing sender credentials is not specified 
in SUSv3. Aside from Linux, this feature is implemented in some of the 
modern BSDs (where the credentials structure contains somewhat more 
information than on Linux), but is available on few other UNIX 
implementations. The details of credential passing on FreeBSD are 
described in [Stevens et al., 2004].</p><p class="docText">On
 Linux, a privileged process can fake the user ID, group ID, and process
 ID that are passed as credentials if it has, respectively, the <tt>CAP_SETUID</tt>, <tt>CAP_SETGID</tt>, and <tt>CAP_SYS_ADMIN</tt> capabilities.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">An example of passing credentials is provided in the files <tt>scm_cred_send.c</tt> and <tt>scm_cred_recv.c</tt> in the <tt>sockets</tt> subdirectory in the source code distribution for this book.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDWHM">61.13.5. Sequenced-Packet Sockets</h4><p class="docText">Sequenced-packet sockets combine features of both stream and datagram sockets:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Like
 stream sockets, sequenced-packet sockets are connection-oriented. 
Connections are established in the same way as for stream sockets, using
 <span class="docEmphasis">bind()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">listen()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">connect()</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Like datagram sockets, message boundaries are preserved. A <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>
 from a sequenced-packet socket returns exactly one message (as written 
by the peer). If the message is longer than the buffer supplied by the 
caller, the excess bytes are discarded.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Like
 stream sockets, and unlike datagram sockets, communication via 
sequenced-packet sockets is reliable. Messages are delivered to the peer
 application error-free, in order, and unduplicated, and they are 
guaranteed to arrive (assuming that there is not a system or application
 crash, or a network outage).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">A sequenced-packet socket is created by calling <span class="docEmphasis">socket()</span> with the <span class="docEmphasis">type</span> argument specified as <tt>SOCK_SEQPACKET</tt>.</p><p class="docText">Historically,
 Linux, like most UNIX implementations, did not support sequenced-packet
 sockets in either the UNIX or the Internet domains. However, starting 
with kernel 2.6.4, Linux supports <tt>SOCK_SEQPACKET</tt> for UNIX domain sockets.</p><p class="docText">In the Internet domain, the UDP and TCP protocols do not support <tt>SOCK_SEQPACKET</tt>, but the SCTP protocol (described in the next section) does.</p><p class="docText">We
 don’t show an example of the use of sequenced-packet sockets in this 
book, but, other than the preservation of message boundaries, their use 
is very similar to stream sockets.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4YHM">61.13.6. SCTP and DCCP Transport-Layer Protocols</h4><p class="docText">SCTP and DCCP are two newer transport-layer protocols that are likely to become increasingly common in the future.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">Stream Control Transmission Protocol</span> (SCTP, http://www.sctp.org/)
 was designed to support telephony signaling in particular, but is also 
general purpose. Like TCP, SCTP provides reliable, bidirectional, 
connection-oriented transport. Unlike TCP, SCTP preserves message 
boundaries. One of the distinctive features of SCTP is multistream 
support, which allows multiple logical data streams to be employed over a
 single connection.</p><p class="docText">SCTP is described in [Stewart &amp; Xie, 2001], [Stevens et al., 2004], and in RFCs 4960, 3257, and 3286.</p><p class="docText">SCTP is available on Linux since kernel 2.6. Further information about this implementation can be found at http://lksctp.sourceforge.net/.</p><p class="docText">Throughout
 the preceding chapters that describe the sockets API, we equated 
Internet domain stream sockets with TCP. However, SCTP provides an 
alternative protocol for implementing stream sockets, created using the 
following call:</p><pre>socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM, IPPROTO_SCTP);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Starting in kernel 2.6.14, Linux supports a new datagram protocol, the <span class="docEmphasis">Datagram Congestion Control Protocol</span>
 (DCCP). Like TCP, DCCP provides congestion control (removing the need 
to implement congestion control at the application level) to prevent a 
fast transmitter from overwhelming the network. (We explained congestion
 control when describing TCP in Section 58.6.3.)
 However, unlike TCP (but like UDP), DCCP doesn’t provide guarantees 
about reliable or in-order delivery, and thus allows applications that 
don’t need these features to avoid the delays that they can incur. 
Information about DCCP can be found at http://www.read.cs.ucla.edu/dccp/ and RFCs 4336 and 4340.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
