<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>61.14. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">61.14. Summary</h3><p class="docText">In
 various circumstances, partial reads and writes can occur when 
performing I/O on stream sockets. We showed the implementation of two 
functions, <span class="docEmphasis">readn()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">writen()</span>, that can be used to ensure a complete buffer of data is read or written.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">shutdown()</span> system call provides more precise control over connection termination. Using <span class="docEmphasis">shutdown()</span>,
 we can forcibly shut down either or both halves of a bidirectional 
communication stream, regardless of whether there are other open file 
descriptors referring to the socket.</p><p class="docText">Like <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">recv()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">send()</span> can be used to perform I/O on a socket, but calls provide an extra argument, <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>, that controls socket-specific I/O functionality.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">sendfile()</span>
 system call allows us to efficiently copy the contents of a file to a 
socket. This efficiency is gained because we don’t need to copy the file
 data to and from user memory, as would be required with calls to <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getsockname()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getpeername()</span>
 system calls retrieve, respectively, the local address to which a 
socket is bound and the address of the peer to which that socket is 
connected.</p><p class="docText">We 
considered some details of the operation of TCP, including TCP states 
and the TCP state transition diagram, and TCP connection establishment 
and termination. As part of this discussion, we saw why the TIME_WAIT 
state is an important part of TCP’s reliability guarantee. Although this
 state can lead to the “Address already in use” error when restarting a 
server, we later saw that the <tt>SO_REUSEADDR</tt> socket option can be used to avoid this error, while nevertheless allowing the TIME_WAIT state to serve its intended purpose.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">netstat</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">tcpdump</span> commands are useful tools for monitoring and debugging applications that use sockets.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getsockopt()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">setsockopt()</span> system calls retrieve and modify options affecting the operation of a socket.</p><p class="docText">On Linux, when a new socket is created by <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span>,
 it does not inherit the listening sockets open file status flags, file 
descriptor flags, or file descriptor attributes related to signal-driven
 I/O. However, it does inherit the settings of socket options. We noted 
that SUSv3 is silent on these details, which vary across 
implementations.</p><p class="docText">Although 
UDP doesn’t provide the reliability guarantees of TCP, we saw that there
 are nevertheless reasons why UDP can be preferable for some 
applications.</p><p class="docText">Finally, we outlined a few advanced features of sockets programming that we don’t describe in detail in this book.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6QHM">61.14.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EDRHM">61.14.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">Refer to the sources of further information listed in Section 59.15.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
