<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>61.15. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">61.15. Exercises</h3><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Suppose that the program in Example 61-2 (<tt>is_echo_cl.c</tt>) was modified so that, instead of using <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>
 to create two processes that operate concurrently, it instead used just
 one process that first copies its standard input to the socket and then
 reads the server’s response. What problem might occur when running this
 client? (Look at Figure 58-8, in Section 58.6.2.1.)</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Implement <span class="docEmphasis">pipe()</span> in terms of <span class="docEmphasis">socketpair()</span>. Use <span class="docEmphasis">shutdown()</span> to ensure that the resulting pipe is unidirectional.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Implement a replacement for <span class="docEmphasis">sendfile()</span> using <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">lseek()</span>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write a program that uses <span class="docEmphasis">getsockname()</span> to show that, if we call <span class="docEmphasis">listen()</span> on a TCP socket without first calling <span class="docEmphasis">bind()</span>, the socket is assigned an ephemeral port number.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write
 a client and a server that permit the client to execute arbitrary shell
 commands on the server host. (If you don’t implement any security 
mechanism in this application, you should ensure that the server is 
operating under a user account where it can do no damage if invoked by 
malicious users.) The client should be executed with two command-line 
arguments:</p><pre>$ <b>./is_shell_cl</b> <b><tt><i>server-host</i></tt></b><b>'</b><b><tt><i>some-shell-command</i></tt></b><b>'</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docList">After connecting to the 
server, the client sends the given command to the server, and then 
closes its writing half of the socket using <span class="docEmphasis">shutdown()</span>,
 so that the server sees end-of-file. The server should handle each 
incoming connection in a separate child process (i.e., a concurrent 
design). For each incoming connection, the server should read the 
command from the socket (until end-of-file), and then exec a shell to 
perform the command. Here are a couple hints:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">See the implementation of <span class="docEmphasis">system()</span> in Section 27.7 for an example of how to execute a shell command.</p></li><li><p class="docList">By using <span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span> to duplicate the socket on standard output and standard error, the execed command will automatically write to the socket.</p></li></ul></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Section 61.13.1
 noted that an alternative to out-of-band data would be to create two 
socket connections between the client and server: one for normal data 
and one for priority data. Write client and server programs that 
implement this framework. Here are a few hints:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The
 server needs some way of knowing which two sockets belong to the same 
client. One way to do this is to have the client first create a 
listening socket using an ephemeral port (i.e., binding to port 0). 
After obtaining the ephemeral port number of its listening socket (using
 <span class="docEmphasis">getsockname()</span>), the
 client connects its “normal” socket to the server’s listening socket 
and sends a message containing the port number of the client’s listening
 socket. The client then waits for the server to use the client’s 
listening socket to make a connection in the opposite direction for the 
“priority” socket. (The server can obtain the client’s IP address during
 the <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span> of the normal connection.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">Implement
 some type of security mechanism to prevent a rogue process from trying 
to connect to the client’s listening socket. To do this, the client 
could send a cookie (i.e., some type of unique message) to the server 
using the normal socket. The server would then return this cookie via 
the priority socket so that the client could verify it.</p></li><li><p class="docList">In
 order to experiment with transmitting normal and priority data from the
 client to the server, you will need to code the server to multiplex the
 input from the two sockets using <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> (described in Section 63.2).</p></li></ul></div></li></ol></div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
