<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 62. Terminals</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0EPPHM">Chapter 62. Terminals</h2><p class="docText">Historically,
 users accessed a UNIX system using a terminal connected via a serial 
line (an RS-232 connection). Terminals were cathode ray tubes (CRTs) 
capable of displaying characters and, in some cases, primitive graphics.
 Typically, CRTs provided a monochrome display of 24 lines by 80 
columns. By today’s standards, these CRTs were small and expensive. In 
even earlier times, terminals were sometimes hard-copy teletype devices.
 Serial lines were also used to connect other devices, such as printers 
and modems, to a computer or to connect one computer to another.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On early UNIX systems, the terminal lines connected to the system were represented by character devices with names of the form <tt>/dev/tty</tt><span class="docEmphasis">n</span>. (On Linux, the /<tt>dev/tty</tt><span class="docEmphasis">n</span> devices are the virtual consoles on the system.) It is common to see the abbreviation <span class="docEmphasis">tty</span> (derived from teletype) as a shorthand for <span class="docEmphasis">terminal</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Especially
 during the early years of UNIX, terminal devices were not standardized,
 which meant that different character sequences were required to perform
 operations such as moving the cursor to the beginning of the line or 
the top of the screen. (Eventually, some vendor implementations of such <span class="docEmphasis">escape sequences</span>—for
 example, Digital’s VT-100—became de facto and, ultimately, ANSI 
standards, but a wide variety of terminal types continued to exist.) 
This lack of standardization meant that it was difficult to write 
portable programs that used terminal features. The <span class="docEmphasis">vi</span> editor was an early example of a program with such requirements. The <span class="docEmphasis">termcap</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">terminfo</span>
 databases (described in [Strang et al., 1988]), which tabulate how to 
perform various screen-control operations for a wide variety of terminal
 types, and the <span class="docEmphasis">curses</span> library ([Strang, 1986]) were developed in response to this lack of standardization.</p><p class="docText">It
 is no longer common to see a conventional terminal. The usual interface
 to modern UNIX systems is an X Window System window manager on a 
high-performance bit-mapped graphical monitor. (An old-style terminal 
provided functionality roughly equivalent to a single terminal window—an
 <span class="docEmphasis">xterm</span> or 
similar—in an X Window System. The fact that the user of such a terminal
 had only a single “window” to the system was the driving force behind 
the development of the job-control facilities described in Section 
34.7.) Similarly, many devices (e.g., printers) that were once connected
 directly to a computer are now often intelligent devices connected via a
 network.</p><p class="docText">All of the above 
is a preamble to saying that the need to program terminal devices is 
less frequent than it used to be. Therefore, this chapter focuses on the
 aspects of terminal programming that are particularly relevant to 
software terminal emulators (i.e., <span class="docEmphasis">xterm</span>
 and similar). It gives only brief coverage to serial lines; references 
for further information about serial programming are provided at the end
 of this chapter.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
