<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>62.2. Retrieving and Modifying Terminal Attributes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">62.2. Retrieving and Modifying Terminal Attributes</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">tcgetattr()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">tcsetattr()</span> functions retrieve and modify the attributes of a terminal.</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">#include &lt;termios.h&gt;

int <b>tcgetattr</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, struct termios *<span class="docEmphasis">termios_p</span>);
int <b>tcsetattr</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">optional_actions</span>, const struct termios *<span class="docEmphasis">termios_p</span>);

					  </pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Both return 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span> argument is a file descriptor that refers to a terminal. (If <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span> doesn’t refer to a terminal, these functions fail with the error <tt>ENOTTY</tt>.)</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">termios_p</span> argument is a pointer to a <span class="docEmphasis">termios</span> structure, which records terminal attributes:</p><pre>struct termios {
    tcflag_t c_iflag;           /* Input flags */
    tcflag_t c_oflag;           /* Output flags */
    tcflag_t c_cflag;           /* Control flags */
    tcflag_t c_lflag;           /* Local modes */
    cc_t     c_line;            /* Line discipline (nonstandard)*/
    cc_t     c_cc[NCCS];        /* Terminal special characters */
    speed_t  c_ispeed;          /* Input speed (nonstandard; unused) */
    speed_t  c_ospeed;          /* Output speed (nonstandard; unused) */
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The first four fields of the <span class="docEmphasis">termios</span> structure are bit masks (the <span class="docEmphasis">tcflag_t</span>
 data type is an integer type of suitable size) containing flags that 
control various aspects of the terminal driver’s operation:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">c_iflag</span> contains flags controlling terminal input;</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">c_oflag</span> contains flags controlling terminal output;</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">c_cflag</span> contains flags relating to hardware control of the terminal line; and</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">c_lflag</span> contains flags controlling the user interface for terminal input.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">All of the flags used in the above fields are listed in Table 62-2 (in Section 62.5).</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">c_line</span>
 field specifies the line discipline for this terminal. For the purposes
 of programming terminal emulators, the line discipline will always be 
set to <tt>N_TTY</tt>, the so-called <span class="docEmphasis">new</span>
 discipline, a component of the kernel terminal-handling code that 
implements canonical mode I/O processing. Setting the line discipline 
can be relevant when programming serial lines.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">c_cc</span> array contains the terminal special characters (<span class="docEmphasis">interrupt</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">suspend</span>, and so on) as well as fields controlling the operation of noncanonical mode input. The <span class="docEmphasis">cc_t</span> data type is an unsigned integer type suitable for holding these values, and the <tt>NCCS</tt> constant specifies the number of elements in this array. We describe the terminal special characters in Section 62.4.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">c_ispeed</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">c_ospeed</span> fields are unused on Linux (and are not specified in SUSv3). We explain how Linux stores terminal line speeds in Section 62.7.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The Seventh Edition and early BSD terminal driver (known as the <span class="docEmphasis">tty</span>
 driver) had grown over time so that it used no less than four different
 data structures to represent the information equivalent to the <span class="docEmphasis">termios</span> structure. System V replaced this baroque arrangement with a single structure called <span class="docEmphasis">termio</span>. The initial POSIX committee selected the System V API almost as is, in the process renaming it to <span class="docEmphasis">termios</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">When changing terminal attributes with <span class="docEmphasis">tcsetattr()</span>, the <span class="docEmphasis">optional_actions</span> argument determines when the change takes effect. This argument is specified as one of the following values:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">TCSANOW</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The change is carried out immediately.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">TCSADRAIN</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The
 change takes effect after all currently queued output has been 
transmitted to the terminal. Normally, this flag should be specified 
when making changes that affect terminal output, so that we don’t affect
 output that has already been queued but not yet displayed.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">TCSAFLUSH</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The change takes effect as for <tt>TCSADRAIN</tt>,
 but, in addition, any input that is still pending at the time the 
change takes effect is discarded. This is useful, for example, when 
reading a password, where we wish to disable terminal echoing and 
prevent user type-ahead.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">The usual (and recommended) way to change terminal attributes is to use <span class="docEmphasis">tcgetattr()</span> to retrieve a <span class="docEmphasis">termios</span> structure containing a copy of the current settings, change the desired attributes, and then use <span class="docEmphasis">tcsetattr()</span> to push the updated structure back to the driver. (This approach ensures that we pass a fully initialized structure to <span class="docEmphasis">tcsetattr()</span>.) For example, we can use the following sequence to turn terminal echoing off:</p><pre>struct termios tp;

if (tcgetattr(STDIN_FILENO, &amp;tp) == -1)
    errExit("tcgetattr");
tp.c_lflag &amp;= ~ECHO;
if (tcsetattr(STDIN_FILENO, TCSAFLUSH, &amp;tp) == -1)
    errExit("tcsetattr");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">tcsetattr()</span> function returns successfully if <span class="docEmphasis">any</span> of the requested changes to terminal attributes could be performed; it fails only if <span class="docEmphasis">none</span>
 of the requested changes could be made. This means that, when making 
multiple attribute changes, it may sometimes be necessary to make a 
further call to <span class="docEmphasis">tcgetattr()</span> to retrieve the new terminal attributes and compare them against the requested changes.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In Section 34.7.2, we noted that if <span class="docEmphasis">tcsetattr()</span> is called from a process in a background process group, then the terminal driver suspends the process group by delivering a <tt>SIGTTOU</tt> signal, and that, if called from an orphaned process group, <span class="docEmphasis">tcsetattr()</span> fails with the error EIO. The same statements apply for various other functions described in this chapter, including <span class="docEmphasis">tcflush()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">tcflow()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">tcsendbreak()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">tcdrain()</span>.</p><p class="docText">In earlier UNIX implementations, terminal attributes were accessed using <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> calls. Like several other functions described in this chapter, the <span class="docEmphasis">tcgetattr()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">tcsetattr()</span> functions are POSIX inventions designed to address the problem that type checking of the third argument of <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> isn’t possible. On Linux, as in many other UNIX implementations, these are library functions layered on top of <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
