<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>62.3. The stty Command</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">62.3. The <span class="docEmphasis">stty</span> Command</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">stty</span> command is the command-line analog of the <span class="docEmphasis">tcgetattr()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">tcsetattr()</span>
 functions, allowing us to view and change terminal attributes from the 
shell. This is useful when trying to monitor, debug, or undo the effects
 of programs that modify terminal attributes.</p><p class="docText">We can view the current settings of all terminal attributes using the following command (here carried out on a virtual console):</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>stty -a</b>
speed 38400 baud; rows 25; columns 80; line = 0;
intr = ^C; quit = ^\; erase = ^?; kill = ^U; eof = ^D; eol = &lt;undef&gt;;
eol2 = &lt;undef&gt;; start = ^Q; stop = ^S; susp = ^Z; rprnt = ^R;
werase = ^W; lnext = ^V; flush = ^O; min = 1; time = 0;
-parenb -parodd cs8 hupcl -cstopb cread -clocal -crtscts
-ignbrk brkint -ignpar -parmrk -inpck -istrip -inlcr -igncr
 icrnl ixon -ixoff -iuclc -ixany imaxbel -iutf8
opost -olcuc -ocrnl onlcr -onocr -onlret -ofill -ofdel nl0 cr0 tab0 bs0 vt0 ff0
isig icanon iexten echo echoe echok -echonl -noflsh
 -xcase -tostop -echoprt echoctl echoke

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The first line of the 
above output shows the terminal line speed (bits per second), the 
terminal window size, and the line discipline in numeric form (0 
corresponds to <tt>N_TTY</tt>, the new line discipline).</p><p class="docText">The next three lines show the settings of the various terminal special characters. The notation <tt>^C</tt> denotes <span class="docEmphasis">Control-C</span>, and so on. The string <tt>&lt;undef&gt;</tt> means that the corresponding terminal special character is not currently defined. The <span class="docEmphasis">min</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">time</span> values relate to noncanonical mode input, and are described in Section 62.6.2.</p><p class="docText">The remaining lines show the settings of the various flags from (in order) the <span class="docEmphasis">c_cflag</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">c_iflag</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">c_oflag</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">c_lflag</span> fields of the <span class="docEmphasis">termios</span> structure. Where a flag name is preceded by a hyphen (<tt>-</tt>), the flag is currently disabled; otherwise, it is currently enabled.</p><p class="docText">When entered without command-line arguments, <span class="docEmphasis">stty</span> shows just the terminal line speed, the line discipline, and any of the other settings that deviate from sane values.</p><p class="docText">We can change the settings of terminal special characters using commands such as the following:</p><pre>$ <b>stty intr ^L </b>                  <i> Make the interrupt character Control-L</i></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">When specifying a control character as the final argument, we can do so in a variety of ways:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">as a 2-character sequence consisting of a caret (<tt>^</tt>) followed by the corresponding character (as shown above);</p></li><li><p class="docList">as an octal or hexadecimal number (thus: <tt>014</tt> or <tt>0xC</tt>); or</p></li><li><p class="docList">by typing the actual character itself.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">If
 we employ the final option, and the character in question is one 
interpreted specially by the shell or the terminal driver, then we must 
precede it with the <span class="docEmphasis">literal next</span> character (usually <span class="docEmphasis">Control-V</span>):</p><pre>$ <b>stty intr</b> <span class="docEmphasis">Control-V Control-L</span></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">(Although, for readability, a space is shown between the <span class="docEmphasis">Control-V</span> and the <span class="docEmphasis">Control-L</span> in the above example, no white-space characters should be typed between the <span class="docEmphasis">Control-V</span> and the desired character.)</p><p class="docText">It is possible, though unusual, to define terminal special characters to be something other than control characters:</p><pre>$ <b>stty intr q </b>                   <i> Make the interrupt character q</i></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Of course, when we do this, we can no longer use the <span class="docEmphasis">q</span> key for its usual purpose (i.e., generating the letter <span class="docEmphasis">q</span>).</p><p class="docText">To change terminal flags, such as the <tt>TOSTOP</tt> flag, we can use commands such as the following:</p><pre>$ <b>stty tostop </b>                   <i> Enable the</i> TOSTOP <i> flag</i>
$ <b>stty -tostop </b>                  <i> Disable the</i> TOSTOP <i> flag</i></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Sometimes, when developing 
programs that modify terminal attributes, a program may crash, leaving 
the terminal in a state that renders it all but unusable. On a terminal 
emulator, we have the luxury of simply closing the terminal window and 
starting another. Alternatively, we can type in the following character 
sequence to restore the terminal flags and special characters to a 
reasonable state:</p><pre><span class="docEmphasis">Control-J</span> <b>stty sane</b> <span class="docEmphasis">Control-J</span></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">Control-J</span>
 character is the real newline character (ASCII 10 decimal). We use this
 character because, in some modes, the terminal driver may no longer map
 the <span class="docEmphasis">Enter</span> key (ASCII 13 decimal) into a newline character. We type an initial <span class="docEmphasis">Control-J</span>
 to ensure that we have a fresh command line with no preceding 
characters. This may not be easy to verify if, for example, terminal 
echoing has been disabled.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">stty</span> command operates on the terminal referred to by standard input. Using the <span class="docEmphasis">-F</span> option, we can (subject to permission checks) monitor and set the attributes of a terminal other than the one on which the <span class="docEmphasis">stty</span> command is run:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">$ <b>su </b>                            <i> Need privilege to access another user’s terminal</i>
Password:
# <b>stty -a -F /dev/tty3 </b>          <i> Fetch attributes for terminal</i> /dev/tty3
<i> Output omitted for brevity</i>

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">-F</span> option is a Linux-specific extension to the <span class="docEmphasis">stty</span> command. On many other UNIX implementations, <span class="docEmphasis">stty</span>
 always acts on the terminal referred to by standard input, and we must 
use the following alternative form (which can also be used on Linux):</p><pre># <b>stty -a &lt; /dev/tty3</b></pre><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
