<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>62.4. Terminal Special Characters</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">62.4. Terminal Special Characters</h3><p class="docText">Table 62-1
 lists the special characters recognized by the Linux terminal driver. 
The first two columns show the name of the character and the 
corresponding constant that can be used as a subscript in the <span class="docEmphasis">c_cc</span> array. (As can be seen, these constants simply prefix the letter <span class="docEmphasis">V</span> in front of the character name.) The CR and NL characters don’t have corresponding <span class="docEmphasis">c_cc</span> subscripts, because the values of these characters can’t be changed.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">Default setting</span>
 column of the table shows the usual default value for the special 
character. As well as being able to set a terminal special character to a
 specific value, it is also possible to disable the character by setting
 it to the value returned by the call <span class="docEmphasis">fpathconf(fd, _PC_VDISABLE)</span>, where <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span> is a file descriptor referring to a terminal. (On most UNIX implementations, this call returns the value 0.)</p><p class="docText">The operation of each of the special characters is subject to the setting of various flags in the <span class="docEmphasis">termios</span> bit-mask fields (described in Section 62.5), as shown in the penultimate column of the table.</p><p class="docText">The
 final column indicates which of these characters are specified by 
SUSv3. Regardless of the SUSv3 specification, most of these characters 
are supported on all UNIX implementations.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 62-1. Terminal special characters</h5></caption><colgroup span="6"><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Character</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom"><span class="docEmphasis">c_cc</span> subscript</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Description</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Default setting</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Relevant bit-mask flags</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">SUSv3</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">CR</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">(none)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Carriage return</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>^M</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ICANON</tt>, <tt>IGNCR</tt>, <tt>ICRNL</tt>, <tt>OPOST</tt>, <tt>OCRNL</tt>, <tt>ONOCR</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">DISCARD</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>VDISCARD</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Discard output</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>^O</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">(not implemented)</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">EOF</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>VEOF</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">End-of-file</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>^D</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ICANON</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">EOL</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>VEOL</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">End-of-line</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ICANON</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">EOL2</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>VEOL2</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Alternate end-of-line</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ICANON</tt>, <tt>IEXTEN</tt></td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">ERASE</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>VERASE</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Erase character</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>^?</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ICANON</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">INTR</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>VINTR</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Interrupt (<tt>SIGINT</tt>)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>^C</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ISIG</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">KILL</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>VKILL</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Erase line</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>^U</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ICANON</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">LNEXT</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>VLNEXT</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Literal next</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>^V</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ICANON</tt>, <tt>IEXTEN</tt></td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">NL</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">(none)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Newline</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>^J</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ICANON</tt>, <tt>INLCR</tt>, <tt>ECHONL</tt>, <tt>OPOST</tt>, <tt>ONLCR</tt>, <tt>ONLRET</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">QUIT</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>VQUIT</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Quit (<tt>SIGQUIT</tt>)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>^\</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ISIG</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">REPRINT</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>VREPRINT</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Reprint input line</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>^R</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ICANON</tt>, <tt>IEXTEN</tt>, <tt>ECHO</tt></td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">START</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>VSTART</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Start output</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>^Q</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>IXON</tt>, <tt>IXOFF</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">STOP</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>VSTOP</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Stop output</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>^S</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>IXON</tt>, <tt>IXOFF</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">SUSP</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>VSUSP</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Suspend (<tt>SIGTSTP</tt>)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>^Z</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ISIG</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">WERASE</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>VWERASE</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Erase word</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>^W</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ICANON</tt>, <tt>IEXTEN</tt></td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">The
 following paragraphs provide more detailed explanations of the terminal
 special characters. Note that if the terminal driver performs its 
special input interpretation on one of these characters, then—with the 
exception of CR, EOL, EOL2, and NL—the character is discarded (i.e., it 
is not passed to any reading process).</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6GIM">62.4.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EDHIM">62.4.1.1. CR</h5><p class="docText">CR is the <span class="docEmphasis">carriage return</span> character. This character is passed to the reading process. In canonical mode (<tt>ICANON</tt> flag set) with the <tt>ICRNL</tt> (<span class="docEmphasis">map CR to NL on input</span>) flag set (the default), this character is first converted to a newline (ASCII 10 decimal, <tt>^J</tt>) before being passed to the reading process. If the <tt>IGNCR</tt> (<span class="docEmphasis">ignore CR</span>)
 flag is set, then this character is ignored on input (in which case the
 true newline character must be used to terminate a line of input). An 
output CR character causes the terminal to move the cursor to the 
beginning of the line.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EBSIM">62.4.1.2. DISCARD</h5><p class="docText">DISCARD is the <span class="docEmphasis">discard output</span> character. Although this character is defined within the <span class="docEmphasis">c_cc</span>
 array, it has no effect on Linux. On some other UNIX implementations, 
typing this character once causes program output to be discarded. This 
character is a toggle—typing it once more reenables the display of 
output. This is useful when a program is generating a large amount of 
output and we want to skip some of it. (This was much more useful on 
traditional terminals, where line speeds were slower and other “terminal
 windows” were unavailable.) This character is not passed to the reading
 process.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EVUIM">62.4.1.3. EOF</h5><p class="docText">EOF is the canonical mode <span class="docEmphasis">end-of-file</span> character (usually <span class="docEmphasis">Control-D</span>).
 Entering this character at the beginning of a line causes an 
end-of-file condition to be detected by a process reading from the 
terminal (i.e., <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> returns 0). If typed anywhere other than the initial character of a line, then this character simply causes <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>
 to complete immediately, returning the characters so far input in the 
line. In both cases, the EOF character itself is not passed to the 
reading process.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EDVIM">62.4.1.4. EOL and EOL2</h5><p class="docText">EOL and EOL2 are <span class="docEmphasis">additional line-delimiter</span>
 characters that operate like the standard newline (NL) character for 
canonical mode input, terminating a line of input and making it 
available to the reading process. By default, these characters are 
undefined. If they are defined, they are passed to the reading process. 
The EOL2 character is operational only if the <tt>IEXTEN</tt> (<span class="docEmphasis">extended input processing</span>) flag is set (the default).</p><p class="docText">These characters are rarely used. One application that does use them is <span class="docEmphasis">telnet</span>. By setting EOL or EOL2 to be the <span class="docEmphasis">telnet</span> escape character (usually <span class="docEmphasis">Control-]</span>, or, alternatively, the tilde character, ~, if operating in <span class="docEmphasis">rlogin</span> mode), <span class="docEmphasis">telnet</span> is able to immediately catch that character, even while reading input in canonical mode.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E3VIM">62.4.1.5. ERASE</h5><p class="docText">In
 canonical mode, typing the ERASE character erases the previously input 
character on the current line. The erased character and the ERASE 
character itself are not passed to the reading process.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EBWIM">62.4.1.6. INTR</h5><p class="docText">INTR is the <span class="docEmphasis">interrupt</span> character. If the <tt>ISIG</tt> (<span class="docEmphasis">enable signals</span>) flag is set (the default), typing this character causes an <span class="docEmphasis">interrupt</span> signal (<tt>SIGINT</tt>) to be sent to the terminal’s foreground process group (Section 34.2). The INTR character itself is not passed to the reading process.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E5WIM">62.4.1.7. KILL</h5><p class="docText">KILL is the <span class="docEmphasis">erase line</span> (also known as <span class="docEmphasis">kill line</span>)
 character. In canonical mode, typing this character causes the current 
line of input to be discarded (i.e., the characters typed so far, as 
well as the KILL character itself, are not passed to the reading 
process).</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EG1IM">62.4.1.8. LNEXT</h5><p class="docText">LNEXT is the <span class="docEmphasis">literal next</span>
 character. In some circumstances, we may wish to treat one of the 
terminal special characters as though it were a normal character for 
input to a reading process. Typing the literal next character (usually <span class="docEmphasis">Control-V</span>)
 causes the next character to be treated literally, voiding any special 
interpretation of the character that the terminal driver would normally 
perform. Thus, we could enter the 2-character sequence <span class="docEmphasis">Control-V Control-C</span> to supply a real <span class="docEmphasis">Control-C</span>
 character (ASCII 3) as input to the reading process. The LNEXT 
character itself is not passed to the reading process. This character is
 interpreted only in canonical mode with the <tt>IEXTEN</tt> (<span class="docEmphasis">extended input processing</span>) flag set (which is the default).</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EZ1IM">62.4.1.9. NL</h5><p class="docText">NL is the <span class="docEmphasis">newline</span>
 character. In canonical mode, this character terminates an input line. 
The NL character itself is included in the line returned to the reading 
process. (The CR character is normally converted to NL in canonical 
mode.) An output NL character causes the terminal to move the cursor 
down one line. If the <tt>OPOST</tt> and <tt>ONLCR</tt> (<span class="docEmphasis">map NL to CR-NL</span>)
 flags are set (the default), then, on output, a newline character is 
mapped to the 2-character sequence CR plus NL. (The combination of the <tt>ICRNL</tt> and <tt>ONLCR</tt> flags means that an input CR is converted to a NL, and then echoed as CR plus NL.)</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ET2IM">62.4.1.10. QUIT</h5><p class="docText">If the <tt>ISIG</tt> flag is set (the default), typing the QUIT character causes a <span class="docEmphasis">quit</span> signal (<tt>SIGQUIT</tt>) to be sent to the terminal’s foreground process group (Section 34.2). The QUIT character itself is not passed to the reading process.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EG3IM">62.4.1.11. REPRINT</h5><p class="docText">REPRINT is the <span class="docEmphasis">reprint input</span> character. In canonical mode with the <tt>IEXTEN</tt>
 flag set (the default), typing this character causes the current (as 
yet incomplete) line of input to be redisplayed on the terminal. This is
 useful if some other program (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">wall(1)</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">write(1)</span>) has written output that has messed up the terminal display. The REPRINT character itself is not passed to the reading process.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EV3IM">62.4.1.12. START and STOP</h5><p class="docText">START and STOP are the <span class="docEmphasis">start output</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">stop output</span> characters, which operate if the <tt>IXON</tt> (<span class="docEmphasis">enable start/stop output control</span>) flag is enabled (the default). (The START and STOP characters are not honored by some terminal emulators.)</p><p class="docText">Typing the STOP character suspends terminal output. The STOP character itself is not passed to the reading process. If the <tt>IXOFF</tt>
 flag is set and the terminal input queue is full, then the terminal 
driver automatically sends a STOP character to throttle the input.</p><p class="docText">Typing
 the START character causes terminal output to resume after previously 
being stopped by the STOP character. The START character itself is not 
passed to the reading process. If the <tt>IXOFF</tt> (<span class="docEmphasis">enable start/stop input control</span>)
 flag is set (this flag is disabled by default) and the terminal driver 
had previously sent a STOP character because the input queue was full, 
the terminal driver automatically generates a START character when space
 once more becomes available in the input queue.</p><p class="docText">If the <tt>IXANY</tt> flag is set, then any character, not just <tt>START</tt>, may be typed in order to restart output (and that character is similarly not passed to the reading process).</p><p class="docText">The
 START and STOP characters are used for software flow control in either 
direction between the computer and the terminal device. One function of 
these characters is to allow users to stop and start terminal output. 
This is output flow control, as enabled by <tt>IXON</tt>. However, flow control in the other direction (i.e., control of input flow from the device to the computer, as enabled by <tt>IXOFF</tt>)
 is also important when, for example, the device in question is a modem 
or another computer. Input flow control makes sure that no data is lost 
if the application is slow to handle input and the kernel buffers fill 
up.</p><p class="docText">With
 the higher line speeds that are nowadays typical, software flow control
 has been superseded by hardware (RTS/CTS) flow control, whereby data 
flow is enabled and disabled using signals sent via separate wires on 
the serial port. (RTS stands for <span class="docEmphasis">Request To Send</span>, and CTS stands for <span class="docEmphasis">Clear To Send</span>.)</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EL5IM">62.4.1.13. SUSP</h5><p class="docText">SUSP is the <span class="docEmphasis">suspend</span> character. If the <tt>ISIG</tt> flag is set (the default), typing this character causes a <span class="docEmphasis">terminal suspend</span> signal (<tt>SIGTSTP</tt>) to be sent to the terminal’s foreground process group (Section 34.2). The SUSP character itself is not passed to the reading process.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EBBJM">62.4.1.14. WERASE</h5><p class="docText">WERASE is the <span class="docEmphasis">word erase</span> character. In canonical mode, with the <tt>IEXTEN</tt>
 flag set (the default), typing this character erases all characters 
back to the beginning of the previous word. A word is considered to be a
 sequence of letters, digits, and the underscore character. (On some 
UNIX implementations, a word is considered to be delimited by white 
space.)</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EMBJM">62.4.1.15. Other terminal special characters</h5><p class="docText">Other UNIX implementations provide terminal special characters in addition to those listed in Table 62-1.</p><p class="docText">BSD provides the DSUSP and STATUS characters. The DSUSP character (typically <span class="docEmphasis">Control-Y</span>)
 operates in a fashion similar to the SUSP character, but suspends the 
foreground process group only when it attempts to read the character 
(i.e., after all preceding input has been read). Several non-BSD-derived
 implementations also provide the DSUSP character.</p><p class="docText">The STATUS character (typically <span class="docEmphasis">Control-T</span>)
 causes the kernel to display status information on the terminal 
(including the state of the foreground process and how much CPU time it 
has consumed), and sends a <tt>SIGINFO</tt> 
signal to the foreground process group. If desired, processes can catch 
this signal and display further status information. (Linux provides a 
vaguely similar feature in the form of the magic SysRq <span class="docEmphasis">key</span>; see the kernel source file <tt>Documentation/sysrq.txt</tt> for details.)</p><p class="docText">System V derivatives provide the SWTCH character. This character is used to switch shells under <span class="docEmphasis">shell layers</span>, a System V predecessor to job control.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EVCJM">62.4.1.16. Example program</h5><p class="docText">Example 62-1 shows the use of <span class="docEmphasis">tcgetattr()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">tcsetattr()</span> to change the terminal <span class="docEmphasis">interrupt</span> character. This program sets the <span class="docEmphasis">interrupt</span> character to be the character whose numeric value is supplied as the program’s command-line argument, or disables the <span class="docEmphasis">interrupt</span> character if no command-line argument is supplied.</p><p class="docText">The following shell session demonstrates the use of this program. We begin by setting the <span class="docEmphasis">interrupt</span> character to <span class="docEmphasis">Control-L</span> (ASCII 12), and then verify the change with <span class="docEmphasis">stty</span>:</p><pre>$ <b>./new_intr 12</b>
$ <b>stty</b>
speed 38400 baud; line = 0;
intr = ^L;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We then start a process running <span class="docEmphasis">sleep(1)</span>. We find that typing <span class="docEmphasis">Control-C</span> no longer has its usual effect of terminating a process, but typing <span class="docEmphasis">Control-L</span> does terminate the process.</p><pre>$ <b>sleep 10 </b>
^C                              <i> Control-C has no effect; it is just echoed</i>
<i> Type Control-L to terminate sleep</i></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We now display the value of the shell $? variable, which shows the termination status of the last command:</p><pre>$ <b>echo $?</b>
130</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We see that the termination
 status of the process was 130. This indicates that the process was 
killed by signal 130 - 128 = 2; signal number 2 is <tt>SIGINT</tt>.</p><p class="docText">Next, we use our program to disable the <span class="docEmphasis">interrupt</span> character.</p><pre>$ <b>./new_intr </b>
$ <b>stty </b>                          <i> Verify the change</i>
speed 38400 baud; line = 0;
intr = &lt;undef&gt;;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Now we find that neither <span class="docEmphasis">Control-C</span> nor <span class="docEmphasis">Control-L</span> generates a <tt>SIGINT</tt> signal, and we must instead use <span class="docEmphasis">Control-\</span> to terminate a program:</p><pre>$ <b>sleep 10 </b>
^C^L                            <i> Control-C and Control-L are simply echoed</i>
<i> Type Control-\ to generate</i> SIGQUIT
Quit
$ <b>stty sane </b>                     <i> Return terminal to a sane state</i></pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ELGJM">Example 62-1. Changing the terminal <span class="docEmphasis">interrupt</span> character</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>tty/new_intr.c</b>
#include &lt;termios.h&gt;
#include &lt;ctype.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    struct termios tp;
    int intrChar;

    if (argc &gt; 1 &amp;&amp; strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s [intr-char]\n", argv[0]);

    /* Determine new INTR setting from command line */

    if (argc == 1) {                                     /* Disable */
        intrChar = fpathconf(STDIN_FILENO, _PC_VDISABLE);
        if (intrChar == -1)
            errExit("Couldn't determine VDISABLE");
    } else if (isdigit((unsigned char) argv[1][0])) {
        intrChar = strtoul(argv[1], NULL, 0);           /* Allows hex, octal */
    } else {                                            /* Literal character */
        intrChar = argv[1][0];
    }

    /* Fetch current terminal settings, modify INTR character, and
       push changes back to the terminal driver */

    if (tcgetattr(STDIN_FILENO, &amp;tp) == -1)
        errExit("tcgetattr");
    tp.c_cc[VINTR] = intrChar;
    if (tcsetattr(STDIN_FILENO, TCSAFLUSH, &amp;tp) == -1)
        errExit("tcsetattr");

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
      <b>tty/new_intr.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
