<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>62.7. Terminal Line Speed (Bit Rate)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">62.7. Terminal Line Speed (Bit Rate)</h3><p class="docText">Different terminals (and serial lines) are capable of transmitting and receiving at different speeds (bits per second). The <span class="docEmphasis">cfgetispeed()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">cfsetispeed()</span> functions retrieve and modify the input line speed. The <span class="docEmphasis">cfgetospeed()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">cfsetospeed()</span> functions retrieve and modify the output line speed.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The term <span class="docEmphasis">baud</span>
 is commonly used as a synonym for the terminal line speed (in bits per 
second), although this usage is not technically correct. Precisely, baud
 is the per-second rate at which signal changes can occur on the line, 
which is not necessarily the same as the number of bits transmitted per 
second, since the latter depends on how bits are encoded into signals. 
Nevertheless, the term <span class="docEmphasis">baud</span> continues to be used synonymously with <span class="docEmphasis">bit rate</span> (bits per second). (The term <span class="docEmphasis">baud rate</span> is often also used synonymously with <span class="docEmphasis">baud</span>, but this is redundant; the baud is by definition a rate.) To avoid confusion, we’ll generally use terms like <span class="docEmphasis">line speed</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">bit rate</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><pre>#include &lt;termios.h&gt;

speed_t <b>cfgetispeed</b>(const struct termios *<span class="docEmphasis">termios_p</span>);
speed_t <b>cfgetospeed</b>(const struct termios *<span class="docEmphasis">termios_p</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Both return a line speed from given <span class="docEmphasis">termios</span> structure</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><pre>int <b>cfsetospeed</b>(struct termios *<span class="docEmphasis">termios_p</span>, speed_t <span class="docEmphasis">speed</span>);
int <b>cfsetispeed</b>(struct termios *<span class="docEmphasis">termios_p</span>, speed_t <span class="docEmphasis">speed</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Both return 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Each of these functions works on a <span class="docEmphasis">termios</span> structure that must be previously initialized by a call to <span class="docEmphasis">tcgetattr()</span>.</p><p class="docText">For example, to find out the current terminal output line speed, we would do the following:</p><pre>struct termios tp;
speed_t rate;

if (tcgetattr(fd, &amp;tp) == -1)
    errExit("tcgetattr");
rate = cfgetospeed(&amp;tp);
if (rate == -1)
    errExit("cfgetospeed");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If we then wanted to change this line speed, we would continue as follows:</p><pre>if (cfsetospeed(&amp;tp, B38400) == -1)
    errExit("cfsetospeed");
if (tcsetattr(fd, TCSAFLUSH, &amp;tp) == -1)
    errExit("tcsetattr");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">speed_t</span>
 data type is used to store a line speed. Rather than directly assigning
 numeric values for line speeds, a set of symbolic constants (defined in
 <tt>&lt;termios.h&gt;</tt>) is used. These constants define a series of discrete values. Some examples of such constants are <tt>B300</tt>, <tt>B2400</tt>, <tt>B9600</tt>, and <tt>B38400</tt>,
 corresponding, respectively, to the line speeds 300, 2400, 9600, and 
38,400 bits per second. The use of a set of discrete values reflects the
 fact that terminals are normally designed to work with a limited set of
 different (standardized) line speeds, derived from the division of some
 base rate (e.g., 115,200 is typical on PCs) by integral values (e.g., 
115,200 / 12 = 9600).</p><p class="docText">SUSv3 specifies that the terminal line speeds are stored in the <span class="docEmphasis">termios</span> structure, but (deliberately) does not specify where. Many implementations, including Linux, maintain these values in the <span class="docEmphasis">c_cflag</span> field, using the <tt>CBAUD</tt> mask and the <tt>CBAUDEX</tt> flag. (In Section 62.2, we noted that the nonstandard <span class="docEmphasis">c_ispeed</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">c_ospeed</span> fields of the Linux <span class="docEmphasis">termios</span> structure are unused.)</p><p class="docText">Although the <span class="docEmphasis">cfsetispeed()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">cfsetospeed()</span>
 functions allow separate input and output line speeds to be specified, 
on many terminals, these two speeds must be the same. Furthermore, Linux
 uses only a single field to store the line speed (i.e., the two rates 
are assumed to be always the same), which means that all of the input 
and output line-speed functions access the same <span class="docEmphasis">termios</span> field.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Specifying <span class="docEmphasis">speed</span> as 0 in a call to <span class="docEmphasis">cfsetispeed()</span> means “set the input speed to whatever the output speed is when <span class="docEmphasis">tcsetattr()</span> is later called.” This is useful on systems where the two line speeds are maintained as separate values.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
