<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>62.8. Terminal Line Control</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">62.8. Terminal Line Control</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">tcsendbreak()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">tcdrain()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">tcflush()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">tcflow()</span> functions perform tasks that are usually collectively grouped under the term <span class="docEmphasis">line control</span>. (These functions are POSIX inventions designed to replace various <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> operations.)</p><pre>#include &lt;termios.h&gt;

int <b>tcsendbreak</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">duration</span>);
int <b>tcdrain</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>);
int <b>tcflush</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">queue_selector</span>);
int <b>tcflow</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">action</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">All return 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">In each function, <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span> is a file descriptor that refers to a terminal or other remote device on a serial line.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">tcsendbreak()</span> function generates a BREAK condition, by transmitting a continuous stream of 0 bits. The <span class="docEmphasis">duration</span> argument specifies the length of the transmission. If <span class="docEmphasis">duration</span> is 0, 0 bits are transmitted for 0.25 seconds. (SUSv3 specifies at least 0.25 and not more than 0.5 seconds.) If <span class="docEmphasis">duration</span> is greater than 0, 0 bits are transmitted for <span class="docEmphasis">duration</span> milliseconds. SUSv3 leaves this case unspecified; the handling of a nonzero <span class="docEmphasis">duration</span> varies widely on other UNIX implementations (the details described here are for <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>).</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">tcdrain()</span> function blocks until all output has been transmitted (i.e., until the terminal output queue has been emptied).</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">tcflush()</span> function flushes (discards) the data in the terminal input queue, the terminal output queue, or both queues (see Figure 62-1).
 Flushing the input queue discards data that has been received by the 
terminal driver but not yet read by any process. For example, an 
application can use <span class="docEmphasis">tcflush()</span>
 to discard terminal type-ahead before prompting for a password. 
Flushing the output queue discards data that has been written (passed to
 the terminal driver) but not yet transmitted to the device. The <span class="docEmphasis">queue_selector</span> argument specifies one of the values shown in Table 62-4.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Note that the term <span class="docEmphasis">flush</span> is used in a different sense with <span class="docEmphasis">tcflush()</span> than when talking about file I/O. For file I/O, <span class="docEmphasis">flushing</span> means forcing the output to be transferred either user-space memory to the buffer cache in the case of the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio fflush()</span>, or from the buffer cache to the disk, in the case of <span class="docEmphasis">fsync()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fdatasync()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">sync()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 62-4. Values for the <span class="docEmphasis">tcflush() queue_selector</span> argument</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Value</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>TCIFLUSH</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Flush the input queue</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>TCOFLUSH</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Flush the output queue</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>TCIOFLUSH</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Flush both the input and the output queues</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">tcflow()</span> function controls the flow of data in either direction between the computer and the terminal (or other remote device). The <span class="docEmphasis">action</span> argument is one of the values shown in Table 62-5. The <tt>TCIOFF</tt> and <tt>TCION</tt>
 values are effective only if the terminal is capable of interpreting 
STOP and START characters, in which case these operations respectively 
cause the terminal to suspend and resume sending data to the computer, 
respectively.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 62-5. Values for the <span class="docEmphasis">tcflush() action</span> argument</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Value</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>TCOOFF</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Suspend output to the terminal</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>TCOON</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Resume output to the terminal</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>TCIOFF</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Transmit a STOP character to the terminal</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>TCION</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Transmit a START character to the terminal</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
