<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>62.9. Terminal Window Size</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">62.9. Terminal Window Size</h3><p class="docText">In
 a windowing environment, a screen-handling application needs to be able
 to monitor the size of a terminal window, so that the screen can be 
redrawn appropriately if the user modifies the window size. The kernel 
provides two pieces of support to allow this to happen:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">A <tt>SIGWINCH</tt> signal is sent to the foreground process group after a change in the terminal window size. By default, this signal is ignored.</p></li><li><p class="docList">At any time—usually following the receipt of a <tt>SIGWINCH</tt> signal—a process can use the <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> <tt>TIOCGWINSZ</tt> operation to find out the current size of the terminal window.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> <tt>TIOCGWINSZ</tt> operation is used as follows:</p><pre>if (ioctl(fd, TIOCGWINSZ, &amp;ws) == -1)
    errExit("ioctl");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span> argument is a file descriptor referring to a terminal window. The final argument to <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> is a pointer to a <span class="docEmphasis">winsize</span> structure (defined in <tt>&lt;sys/ioctl.h&gt;</tt>), used to return the terminal window size:</p><pre>struct winsize {
    unsigned short ws_row;          /* Number of rows (characters) */
    unsigned short ws_col;          /* Number of columns (characters) */
    unsigned short ws_xpixel;       /* Horizontal size (pixels) */
    unsigned short ws_ypixel;       /* Vertical size (pixels) */
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Like many other implementations, Linux doesn’t use the pixel-size fields of the <span class="docEmphasis">winsize</span> structure.</p><p class="docText">Example 62-5 demonstrates the use of the <tt>SIGWINCH</tt> signal and the <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> <tt>TIOCGWINSZ</tt>
 operation. The following shows an example of the output produced when 
this program is run under a window manager and the terminal window size 
is changed three times:</p><pre>$ <b>./demo_SIGWINCH </b>
Caught SIGWINCH, new window size: 35 rows * 80 columns
Caught SIGWINCH, new window size: 35 rows * 73 columns
Caught SIGWINCH, new window size: 22 rows * 73 columns
<i> Type Control-C to terminate program</i></pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ETEIM">Example 62-5. Monitoring changes in the terminal window size</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>tty/demo_SIGWINCH.c</b>
#include &lt;signal.h&gt;
#include &lt;termios.h&gt;
#include &lt;sys/ioctl.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

static void
sigwinchHandler(int sig)
{
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    struct winsize ws;
    struct sigaction sa;

    sigemptyset(&amp;sa.sa_mask);
    sa.sa_flags = 0;
    sa.sa_handler = sigwinchHandler;
    if (sigaction(SIGWINCH, &amp;sa, NULL) == -1)
        errExit("sigaction");

    for (;;) {
        pause();                        /* Wait for SIGWINCH signal */

        if (ioctl(STDIN_FILENO, TIOCGWINSZ, &amp;ws) == -1)
            errExit("ioctl");
        printf("Caught SIGWINCH, new window size: "
                "%d rows * %d columns\n", ws.ws_row, ws.ws_col);
    }
}
     <b>tty/demo_SIGWINCH.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">It is also possible to change the terminal driver’s notion of the window size by passing an initialized <span class="docEmphasis">winsize</span> structure in an <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> <tt>TIOCSWINSZ</tt> operation:</p><pre>ws.ws_row = 40;
ws.ws_col = 100;
if (ioctl(fd, TIOCSWINSZ, &amp;ws) == -1)
    errExit("ioctl");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If the new values in the <span class="docEmphasis">winsize</span> structure differ from the terminal driver’s current notion of the terminal window size, two things happen:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The terminal driver data structures are updated using the values supplied in the <span class="docEmphasis">ws</span> argument.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A <tt>SIGWINCH</tt> signal is sent to the foreground process group of the terminal.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Note,
 however, that these events on their own are insufficient to change the 
actual dimensions of the displayed window, which are controlled by 
software outside the kernel (such as a window manager or a terminal 
emulator program).</p><p class="docText">Although not standardized in SUSv3, most UNIX implementations provide access to the terminal window size using the <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> operations described in this section.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
