<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>62.10. Terminal Identification</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">62.10. Terminal Identification</h3><p class="docText">In Section 34.4, we described the <span class="docEmphasis">ctermid()</span> function, which returns the name of the controlling terminal for a process (usually <tt>/dev/tty</tt> on UNIX systems). The functions described in this section are also useful for identifying a terminal.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">isatty()</span> function enables us to determine whether a file descriptor, <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, is associated with a terminal (as opposed to some other file type).</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

int <b>isatty</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns true (1) if <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span> is associated with a terminal, otherwise false (0)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">isatty()</span>
 function is useful in editors and other screen-handling programs that 
need to determine whether their standard input and output are directed 
to a terminal.</p><p class="docText">Given a file descriptor, the <span class="docEmphasis">ttyname()</span> function returns the name of the associated terminal device.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

char *<b>ttyname</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns pointer to (statically allocated) string containing terminal name, or <tt>NULL</tt> on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">To find the name of the terminal, <span class="docEmphasis">ttyname()</span> uses the <span class="docEmphasis">opendir()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">readdir()</span> functions described in Section 18.8
 to walk through the directories holding terminal device names, looking 
at each directory entry until it finds one whose device ID (the <span class="docEmphasis">st_rdev</span> field of the <span class="docEmphasis">stat</span> structure) matches that of the device referred to by the file descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>. Terminal device entries normally reside in two directories: <tt>/dev</tt> and <tt>/dev/pts</tt>. The <tt>/dev</tt> directory contains entries for virtual consoles (e.g., <tt>/dev/tty1</tt>) and BSD pseudoterminals. The <tt>/dev/pts</tt> directory contains entries for (System V-style) pseudoterminal slave devices. (We describe pseudoterminals in Chapter 64.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">A reentrant version of <span class="docEmphasis">ttyname()</span> exists in the form of <span class="docEmphasis">ttyname_r()</span>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">tty(1)</span> command, which displays the name of the terminal referred to by its standard input, is the command-line analog of <span class="docEmphasis">ttyname()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
