<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>62.11. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">62.11. Summary</h3><p class="docText">On
 early UNIX systems, terminals were real hardware devices connected to a
 computer via serial lines. Early terminals were not standardized, 
meaning that different escape sequences were required to program the 
terminals produced by different vendors. On modern workstations, such 
terminals have been superseded by bit-mapped monitors running the X 
Window System. However, the ability to program terminals is still 
required when dealing with virtual devices, such as virtual consoles and
 terminal emulators (which employ pseudoterminals), and real devices 
connected via serial lines.</p><p class="docText">Terminal settings (with the exception of the terminal window size) are maintained in a structure of type <span class="docEmphasis">termios</span>,
 which contains four bit-mask fields that control various terminal 
settings and an array that defines the various special characters 
interpreted by the terminal driver. The <span class="docEmphasis">tcgetattr()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">tcsetattr()</span> functions allow a program to retrieve and modify the terminal settings.</p><p class="docText">When
 performing input, the terminal driver can operate in two different 
modes. In canonical mode, input is gathered into lines (terminated by 
one of the line-delimiter characters) and line editing is enabled. By 
contrast, noncanonical mode allows an application to read terminal input
 a character at a time, without needing to wait for the user to type a 
line-delimiter character. Line editing is disabled in noncanonical mode.
 Completion of a noncanonical mode read is controlled by the MIN and 
TIME fields of the <span class="docEmphasis">termios</span>
 structure, which determine the minimum number of characters to be read 
and a timeout to be applied to the read operation. We described four 
distinct cases for the operation of noncanonical reads.</p><p class="docText">Historically,
 the Seventh Edition and BSD terminal drivers provided three input 
modes—cooked, cbreak, and raw—which performed varying degrees of 
processing of terminal input and output. Cbreak and raw modes can be 
emulated by changing various fields within the <span class="docEmphasis">termios</span> structure.</p><p class="docText">A
 range of functions perform various other terminal operations. These 
include changing the terminal line speed and performing line-control 
operations (generating a break condition, pausing until output has been 
transmitted, flushing terminal input and output queues, and suspending 
or resuming transmission of data in either direction between the 
terminal and the computer). Other functions allow us to check if a given
 file descriptor refers to a terminal and to obtain the name of that 
terminal. The <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span>
 system call can be used to retrieve and modify the terminal window size
 recorded by the kernel, and to perform a range of other 
terminal-related operations.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EYAIM">62.11.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E3AIM">62.11.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">[Stevens,
 1992] also describes terminal programming and goes into much more 
detail on programming serial ports. Several good online resources 
discuss terminal programming. Hosted at the LDP web site (http://www.tldp.org) are the <span class="docEmphasis">Serial HOWTO</span> and the <span class="docEmphasis">Text-terminal HOWTO</span>, both by David S. Lawyer. Another useful source of information is the <span class="docEmphasis">Serial Programming Guide for POSIX Operating Systems</span> by Michael R. Sweet, available online at http://www.easysw.com/~mike/serial/.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
