<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>63.1. Overview</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">63.1. Overview</h3><p class="docText">Most
 of the programs that we have presented so far in this book employ an 
I/O model under which a process performs I/O on just one file descriptor
 at a time, and each I/O system call blocks until the data is 
transferred. For example, when reading from a pipe, a <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> call normally blocks if no data is currently present in the pipe, and a <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>
 call blocks if there is insufficient space in the pipe to hold the data
 to be written. Similar behavior occurs when performing I/O on various 
other types of files, including FIFOs and sockets.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Disk files are a special case. As described in Chapter 13, the kernel employs the buffer cache to speed disk I/O requests. Thus, a <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>
 to a disk returns as soon as the requested data has been transferred to
 the kernel buffer cache, rather than waiting until the data is written 
to disk (unless the <tt>O_SYNC</tt> flag was specified when opening the file). Correspondingly, a <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>
 transfers data from the buffer cache to a user buffer, and if the 
required data is not in the buffer cache, then the kernel puts the 
process to sleep while a disk read is performed.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The
 traditional blocking I/O model is sufficient for many applications, but
 not all. In particular, some applications need to able to do one or 
both of the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Check whether I/O is possible on a file descriptor without blocking if it is not possible.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Monitor multiple file descriptors to see if I/O is possible on any of them.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">We
 have already encountered two techniques that can be used to partially 
address these needs: nonblocking I/O and the use of multiple processes 
or threads.</p><p class="docText">We described nonblocking I/O in some detail in Section 5.9 and Section 44.9. If we place a file descriptor in nonblocking mode by enabling the <tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt>
 open file status flag, then an I/O system call that can’t be 
immediately completed returns an error instead of blocking. Nonblocking 
I/O can be employed with pipes, FIFOs, sockets, terminals, 
pseudoterminals, and some other types of devices.</p><p class="docText">Nonblocking
 I/O allows us to periodically check (“poll”) whether I/O is possible on
 a file descriptor. For example, we can make an input file descriptor 
nonblocking, and then periodically perform nonblocking reads. If we need
 to monitor multiple file descriptors, then we mark them all 
nonblocking, and poll each of them in turn. However, polling in this 
manner is usually undesirable. If polling is done only infrequently, 
then the latency before an application responds to an I/O event may be 
unacceptably long; on the other hand, polling in a tight loop wastes CPU
 time.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In this chapter, we use the word <span class="docEmphasis">poll</span> in two distinct ways. One of these is as the name of the I/O multiplexing system call, <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>. In the other use, we mean “performing a nonblocking check on the status of a file descriptor.”</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If
 we don’t want a process to block when performing I/O on a file 
descriptor, we can instead create a new process to perform the I/O. The 
parent process can then carry on to perform other tasks, while the child
 process blocks until the I/O is complete. If we need to handle I/O on 
multiple file descriptors, we can create one child for each descriptor. 
The problems with this approach are expense and complexity. Creating and
 maintaining processes places a load on the system, and, typically, the 
child processes will need to use some form of IPC to inform the parent 
about the status of I/O operations.</p><p class="docText">Using
 multiple threads instead of processes is less demanding of resources, 
but the threads will probably still need to communicate information to 
one another about the status of I/O operations, and the programming can 
be complex, especially if we are using thread pools to minimize the 
number of threads used to handle large numbers of simultaneous clients. 
(One place where threads can be particularly useful is if the 
application needs to call a third-party library that performs blocking 
I/O. An application can avoid blocking in this case by making the 
library call in a separate thread.)</p><p class="docText">Because
 of the limitations of both nonblocking I/O and the use of multiple 
threads or processes, one of the following alternatives is often 
preferable:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">I/O multiplexing</span> allows a process to simultaneously monitor multiple file descriptors to find out whether I/O is possible on any of them. The <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> system calls perform I/O multiplexing.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Signal-driven I/O</span>
 is a technique whereby a process requests that the kernel send it a 
signal when input is available or data can be written on a specified 
file descriptor. The process can then carry on performing other 
activities, and is notified when I/O becomes possible via receipt of the
 signal. When monitoring large numbers of file descriptors, 
signal-driven I/O provides significantly better performance than <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span> API is a Linux-specific feature that first appeared in Linux 2.6. Like the I/O multiplexing APIs, the <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>
 API allows a process to monitor multiple file descriptors to see if I/O
 is possible on any of them. Like signal-driven I/O, the <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span> API provides much better performance when monitoring large numbers of file descriptors.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In
 the remainder of this chapter, we’ll generally frame the discussion of 
the above techniques in terms of processes. However, these techniques 
can also be employed in multithreaded applications.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">In effect, I/O multiplexing, signal-driven I/O, and <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>
 are all methods of achieving the same result—monitoring one or, 
commonly, several file descriptors simultaneously to see if they are <span class="docEmphasis">ready</span>
 to perform I/O (to be precise, to see whether an I/O system call could 
be performed without blocking). The transition of a file descriptor into
 a ready state is triggered by some type of I/O <span class="docEmphasis">event</span>,
 such as the arrival of input, the completion of a socket connection, or
 the availability of space in a previously full socket send buffer after
 TCP transmits queued data to the socket peer. Monitoring multiple file 
descriptors is useful in applications such as network servers that must 
simultaneously monitor multiple client sockets, or applications that 
must simultaneously monitor input from a terminal and a pipe or socket.</p><p class="docText">Note
 that none of these techniques performs I/O. They merely tell us that a 
file descriptor is ready. Some other system call must then be used to 
actually perform the I/O.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">One
 I/O model that we don’t describe in this chapter is POSIX asynchronous 
I/O (AIO). POSIX AIO allows a process to queue an I/O operation to a 
file and then later be notified when the operation is complete. The 
advantage of POSIX AIO is that the initial I/O call returns immediately,
 so that the process is not tied up waiting for data to be transferred 
to the kernel or for the operation to complete. This allows the process 
to perform other tasks in parallel with the I/O (which may include 
queuing further I/O requests). For certain types of applications, POSIX 
AIO can provide useful performance benefits. Currently, Linux provides a
 threads-based implementation of POSIX AIO within <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>.
 At the time of writing, work is ongoing toward providing an in-kernel 
implementation of POSIX AIO, which should provide better scaling 
performance. POSIX AIO is described in [Gallmeister, 1995], [Robbins 
&amp; Robbins, 2003], and the <span class="docEmphasis">aio(7)</span> manual page.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EMHIM">63.1.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EQHIM">63.1.1.1. Which technique?</h5><p class="docText">During
 the course of this chapter, we’ll consider the reasons we may choose 
one of these techniques rather than another. In the meantime, we 
summarize a few points:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>
 system calls are long-standing interfaces that have been present on 
UNIX systems for many years. Compared to the other techniques, their 
primary advantage is portability. Their main disadvantage is that they 
don’t scale well when monitoring large numbers (hundreds or thousands) 
of file descriptors.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The key advantage of the <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>
 API is that it allows an application to efficiently monitor large 
numbers of file descriptors. Its primary disadvantage is that it is a 
Linux-specific API.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Some other UNIX implementations provide (nonstandard) mechanisms similar to <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>. For example, Solaris provides the special <tt>/dev/poll</tt> file (described in the Solaris <span class="docEmphasis">poll(7d)</span> manual page), and some of the BSDs provide the <span class="docEmphasis">kqueue</span> API (which provides a more general-purpose monitoring facility than <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>). [Stevens et al., 2004] briefly describes these two mechanisms; a longer discussion of <span class="docEmphasis">kqueue</span> can be found in [Lemon, 2001].</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li><li><p class="docList">Like <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>, signal-driven I/O allows an application to efficiently monitor large numbers of file descriptors. However, <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span> provides a number of advantages over signal-driven I/O:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">We avoid the complexities of dealing with signals.</p></li><li><p class="docList">We can specify the kind of monitoring that we want to perform (e.g., ready for reading or ready for writing).</p></li><li><p class="docList">We can select either level-triggered or edge-triggered notification (described in Section 63.1.1).</p></li></ul><p class="docList">Furthermore,
 taking full advantage of signal-driven I/O requires the use of 
nonportable, Linux-specific features, and if we do this, signal-driven 
I/O is no more portable than <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Because, on the one hand, <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> are more portable, while signal-driven I/O and <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>
 deliver better performance, for some applications, it can be worthwhile
 writing an abstract software layer for monitoring file descriptor 
events. With such a layer, portable programs can employ <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span> (or a similar API) on systems that provide it, and fall back to the use of <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> on other systems.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">libevent</span>
 library is a software layer that provides an abstraction for monitoring
 file descriptor events. It has been ported to a number of UNIX systems.
 As its underlying mechanism, <span class="docEmphasis">libevent</span> can (transparently) employ any of the techniques described in this chapter: <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>, signal-driven I/O, or <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>, as well as the Solaris specific <tt>/dev/poll</tt> interface or the BSD <span class="docEmphasis">kqueue</span> interface. (Thus, <span class="docEmphasis">libevent</span> also serves as an example of how to use each of these techniques.) Written by Niels Provos, <span class="docEmphasis">libevent</span> is available at http://monkey.org/~provos/libevent/.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E1KIM">63.1.2. Level-Triggered and Edge-Triggered Notification</h4><p class="docText">Before
 discussing the various alternative I/O mechanisms in detail, we need to
 distinguish two models of readiness notification for a file descriptor:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Level-triggered notification</span>: A file descriptor is considered to be ready if it is possible to perform an I/O system call without blocking.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Edge-triggered notification</span>: Notification is provided if there is I/O activity (e.g., new input) on a file descriptor since it was last monitored.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Table 63-1 summarizes the notification models employed by I/O multiplexing, signal-driven I/O, and <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>
 API differs from the other two I/O models in that it can employ both 
level-triggered notification (the default) and edge-triggered 
notification.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 63-1. Use of level-triggered and edge-triggered notification models</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">I/O model</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Level-triggered?</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Edge-triggered?</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Signal-driven I/O</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">Details
 of the differences between these two notification models will become 
clearer during the course of the chapter. For now, we describe how the 
choice of notification model affects the way we design a program.</p><p class="docText">When
 we employ level-triggered notification, we can check the readiness of a
 file descriptor at any time. This means that when we determine that a 
file descriptor is ready (e.g., it has input available), we can perform 
some I/O on the descriptor, and then repeat the monitoring operation to 
check if the descriptor is still ready (e.g., it still has more input 
available), in which case we can perform more I/O, and so on. In other 
words, because the level-triggered model allows us to repeat the I/O 
monitoring operation at any time, it is not necessary to perform as much
 I/O as possible (e.g., read as many bytes as possible) on the file 
descriptor (or even perform any I/O at all) each time we are notified 
that a file descriptor is ready.</p><p class="docText">By
 contrast, when we employ edge-triggered notification, we receive 
notification only when an I/O event occurs. We don’t receive any further
 notification until another I/O event occurs. Furthermore, when an I/O 
event is notified for a file descriptor, we usually don’t know how much 
I/O is possible (e.g., how many bytes are available for reading). 
Therefore, programs that employ edge-triggered notification are usually 
designed according to the following rules:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">After
 notification of an I/O event, the program should—at some point—perform 
as much I/O as possible (e.g., read as many bytes as possible) on the 
corresponding file descriptor. If the program fails to do this, then it 
might miss the opportunity to perform some I/O, because it would not be 
aware of the need to operate on the file descriptor until another I/O 
event occurred. This could lead to spurious data loss or blockages in a 
program. We said “at some point,” because sometimes it may not be 
desirable to perform all of the I/O immediately after we determine that 
the file descriptor is ready. The problem is that we may starve other 
file descriptors of attention if we perform a large amount of I/O on one
 file descriptor. We consider this point in more detail when we describe
 the edge-triggered notification model for <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span> in Section 63.4.6.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If
 the program employs a loop to perform as much I/O as possible on the 
file descriptor, and the descriptor is marked as blocking, then 
eventually an I/O system call will block when no more I/O is possible. 
For this reason, each monitored file descriptor is normally placed in 
nonblocking mode, and after notification of an I/O event, I/O operations
 are performed repeatedly until the relevant system call (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>) fails with the error <tt>EAGAIN</tt> or <tt>EWOULDBLOCK</tt>.</p></li></ul><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E3OIM">63.1.3. Employing Nonblocking I/O with Alternative I/O Models</h4><p class="docText">Nonblocking I/O (the <tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt>
 flag) is often used in conjunction with the I/O models described in 
this chapter. Some examples of why this can be useful are the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">As
 explained in the previous section, nonblocking I/O is usually employed 
in conjunction with I/O models that provide edge-triggered notification 
of I/O events.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If
 multiple processes (or threads) are performing I/O on the same open 
file descriptions, then, from a particular process’s point of view, a 
descriptor’s readiness may change between the time the descriptor was 
notified as being ready and the time of the subsequent I/O call. 
Consequently, a blocking I/O call could block, thus preventing the 
process from monitoring other file descriptors. (This can occur for all 
of the I/O models that we describe in this chapter, regardless of 
whether they employ level-triggered or edge-triggered notification.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">Even after a level-triggered API such as <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>
 informs us that a file descriptor for a stream socket is ready for 
writing, if we write a large enough block of data in a single <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">send()</span>, then the call will nevertheless block.</p></li><li><p class="docList">In rare cases, level-triggered APIs such as <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>
 can return spurious readiness notifications—they can falsely inform us 
that a file descriptor is ready. This could be caused by a kernel bug or
 be expected behavior in an uncommon scenario.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Section
 16.6 of [Stevens et al., 2004] describes one example of spurious 
readiness notifications on BSD systems for a listening socket. If a 
client connects to a server’s listening socket and then resets the 
connection, a <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> performed by the server between these two events will indicate the listening socket as being readable, but a subsequent <span class="docEmphasis">accept()</span> that is performed after the client’s reset will block.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
