<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>63.2. I/O Multiplexing</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">63.2. I/O Multiplexing</h3><p class="docText">I/O
 multiplexing allows us to simultaneously monitor multiple file 
descriptors to see if I/O is possible on any of them. We can perform I/O
 multiplexing using either of two system calls with essentially the same
 functionality. The first of these, <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>,
 appeared along with the sockets API in BSD. This was historically the 
more widespread of the two system calls. The other system call, <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>, appeared in System V. Both <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> are nowadays required by SUSv3.</p><p class="docText">We can use <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>
 to monitor file descriptors for regular files, terminals, 
pseudoterminals, pipes, FIFOs, sockets, and some types of character 
devices. Both system calls allow a process either to block indefinitely 
waiting for file descriptors to become ready or to specify a timeout on 
the call.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENFIM">63.2.1. The <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> System Call</h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> system call blocks until one or more of a set of file descriptors becomes ready.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/time.h&gt;         /* For portability */
#include &lt;sys/select.h&gt;

int <b>select</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">nfds</span>, fd_set *<span class="docEmphasis">readfds</span>, fd_set *<span class="docEmphasis">writefds</span>, fd_set *<span class="docEmphasis">exceptfds</span>,
           struct timeval *<span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns number of ready file descriptors, 0 on timeout, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">nfds</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">readfds</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">writefds</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">exceptfds</span> arguments specify the file descriptors that <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> is to monitor. The <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> argument can be used to set an upper limit on the time for which <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> will block. We describe each of these arguments in detail below.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In the prototype for <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> shown above, we include <tt>&lt;sys/time.h&gt;</tt> because that was the header specified in SUSv2, and some UNIX implementations require this header. (The <tt>&lt;sys/time.h&gt;</tt> header is present on Linux, and including it does no harm.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EEIIM">63.2.1.1. File descriptor sets</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">readfds</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">writefds</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">exceptfds</span> arguments are pointers to <span class="docEmphasis">file descriptor sets</span>, represented using the data type <span class="docEmphasis">fd_set</span>. These arguments are used as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">readfds</span> is the set of file descriptors to be tested to see if input is possible;</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">writefds</span> is the set of file descriptors to be tested to see if output is possible; and</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">exceptfds</span> is the set of file descriptors to be tested to see if an exceptional condition has occurred.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The term <span class="docEmphasis">exceptional condition</span>
 is often misunderstood to mean that some sort of error condition has 
arisen on the file descriptor. This is not the case. An exceptional 
condition occurs in just two circumstances on Linux (other UNIX 
implementations are similar):</p><ul><li><p class="docList">A state change occurs on a pseudoterminal slave connected to a master that is in packet mode (Section 64.5).</p></li><li><p class="docList">Out-of-band data is received on a stream socket (Section 61.13.1).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Typically, the <span class="docEmphasis">fd_set</span>
 data type is implemented as a bit mask. However, we don’t need to know 
the details, since all manipulation of file descriptor sets is done via 
four macros: <tt>FD_ZERO()</tt>, <tt>FD_SET()</tt>, <tt>FD_CLR()</tt>, and <tt>FD_ISSET()</tt>.</p><pre>#include &lt;sys/select.h&gt;

void <b>FD_ZERO</b>(fd_set *<span class="docEmphasis">fdset</span>);
void <b>FD_SET</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, fd_set *<span class="docEmphasis">fdset</span>);
void <b>FD_CLR</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, fd_set *<span class="docEmphasis">fdset</span>);

int <b>FD_ISSET</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>, fd_set *<span class="docEmphasis">fdset</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns true (1) if <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span> is in <span class="docEmphasis">fdset</span>, or false (0) otherwise</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">These macros operate as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><tt>FD_ZERO()</tt> initializes the set pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">fdset</span> to be empty.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>FD_SET()</tt> adds the file descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span> to the set pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">fdset</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>FD_CLR()</tt> removes the file descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span> from the set pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">fdset</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>FD_ISSET()</tt> returns true if the file descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span> is a member of the set pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">fdset</span>.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">A file descriptor set has a maximum size, defined by the constant <tt>FD_SETSIZE</tt>. On Linux, this constant has the value 1024. (Other UNIX implementations have similar values for this limit.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Even though the <tt>FD_*</tt> macros are operating on user-space data structures, and the kernel implementation of <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> can handle descriptor sets with larger sizes, <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> provides no simple way of modifying the definition of <tt>FD_SETSIZE</tt>. If we want to change this limit, we must modify the definition in the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>
 header files. However, for reasons that we describe later in this 
chapter, if we need to monitor large numbers of descriptors, then using <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span> is probably preferable to the use of <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">readfds</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">writefds</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">exceptfds</span> arguments are all value-result. Before the call to <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>, the <span class="docEmphasis">fd_set</span> structures pointed to by these arguments must be initialized (using <tt>FD_ZERO()</tt> and <tt>FD_SET()</tt>) to contain the set of file descriptors of interest. The <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>
 call modifies each of these structures so that, on return, they contain
 the set of file descriptors that are ready. (Since these structures are
 modified by the call, we must ensure that we reinitialize them if we 
are repeatedly calling <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> from within a loop.) The structures can then be examined using <tt>FD_ISSET()</tt>.</p><p class="docText">If we are not interested in a particular class of events, then the corresponding <span class="docEmphasis">fd_set</span> argument can be specified as <tt>NULL</tt>. We say more about the precise meaning of each of the three event types in Section 63.2.3.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">nfds</span>
 argument must be set one greater than the highest file descriptor 
number included in any of the three file descriptor sets. This argument 
allows <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> to 
be more efficient, since the kernel then knows not to check whether file
 descriptor numbers higher than this value are part of each file 
descriptor set.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E1QIM">63.2.1.2. The <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> argument</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> argument controls the blocking behavior of <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>. It can be specified either as <tt>NULL</tt>, in which case <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> blocks indefinitely, or as a pointer to a <span class="docEmphasis">timeval</span> structure:</p><pre>struct timeval {
    time_t      tv_sec;         /* Seconds */
    suseconds_t tv_usec;        /* Microseconds (long int) */
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If both fields of <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> are 0, then <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> doesn’t block; it simply polls the specified file descriptors to see which ones are ready and returns immediately. Otherwise, <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> specifies an upper limit on the time for which <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> is to wait.</p><p class="docText">Although the <span class="docEmphasis">timeval</span>
 structure affords microsecond precision, the accuracy of the call is 
limited by the granularity of the software clock (Section 10.6). SUSv3 
specifies that the timeout is rounded upward if it is not an exact 
multiple of this granularity.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">SUSv3
 requires that the maximum permissible timeout interval be at least 31 
days. Most UNIX implementations allow a considerably higher limit. Since
 Linux/x86-32 uses a 32-bit integer for the <span class="docEmphasis">time_t</span> type, the upper limit is many years.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">When <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> is <tt>NULL</tt>, or points to a structure containing nonzero fields, <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> blocks until one of the following occurs:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">at least one of the file descriptors specified in <span class="docEmphasis">readfds</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">writefds</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">exceptfds</span> becomes ready;</p></li><li><p class="docList">the call is interrupted by a signal handler; or</p></li><li><p class="docList">the amount of time specified by <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> has passed.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In older UNIX implementations that lacked a sleep call with subsecond precision (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">nanosleep()</span>), <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> was used to emulate this functionality by specifying <span class="docEmphasis">nfds</span> as 0; <span class="docEmphasis">readfds</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">writefds</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">exceptfds</span> as <tt>NULL</tt>; and the desired sleep interval in <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">On Linux, if <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> returns because one or more file descriptors became ready, and if <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> was non-<tt>NULL</tt>, then <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> updates the structure to which <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span>
 points to indicate how much time remained until the call would have 
timed out. However, this behavior is implementation-specific. SUSv3 also
 allows the possibility that an implementation leaves the structure 
pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> unchanged, and most other UNIX implementations <span class="docEmphasis">don’t</span> modify this structure. Portable applications that employ <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> within a loop should always ensure that the structure pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> is initialized before each <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> call, and should ignore the information returned in the structure after the call.</p><p class="docText">SUSv3 states that the structure pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> may be modified only on a successful return from <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>. However, on Linux, if <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> is interrupted by a signal handler (so that it fails with the error <tt>EINTR</tt>),
 then the structure is modified to indicate the time remaining until a 
timeout would have occurred (i.e., like a successful return).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">If we use the Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">personality()</span> system call to set a personality that includes the <tt>STICKY_TIMEOUTS</tt> personality bit, then <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> doesn’t modify the structure pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EFWIM">63.2.1.3. Return value from <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span></h5><p class="docText">As its function result, <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> returns one of the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">A return value of -1 indicates that an error occurred. Possible errors include <tt>EBADF</tt> and <tt>EINTR</tt>. <tt>EBADF</tt> indicates that one of the file descriptors in <tt>readfds</tt>, <span class="docEmphasis">writefds</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">exceptfds</span> is invalid (e.g., not currently open). <tt>EINTR</tt>, indicates that the call was interrupted by a signal handler. (As noted in Section 21.5, <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> is never automatically restarted if interrupted by a signal handler.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">A
 return value of 0 means that the call timed out before any file 
descriptor became ready. In this case, each of the returned file 
descriptor sets will be empty.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A
 positive return value indicates that one or more file descriptors is 
ready. The return value is the number of ready descriptors. In this 
case, each of the returned file descriptor sets must be examined (using <tt>FD_ISSET()</tt>) in order to find out which I/O events occurred. If the same file descriptor is specified in more than one of <span class="docEmphasis">readfds</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">writefds</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">exceptfds</span>, it is counted multiple times if it is ready for more than one event. In other words, <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> returns the total number of file descriptors marked as ready in all three returned sets.</p></li></ul><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ETYIM">63.2.1.4. Example program</h5><p class="docText">The program in Example 63-1 demonstrates the use of <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>. Using command-line arguments, we can specify the <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> and the file descriptors that we wish to monitor. The first command-line argument specifies the <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> for <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>, in seconds. If a hyphen (-) is specified here, then <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> is called with a timeout of <tt>NULL</tt>,
 meaning block indefinitely. Each of the remaining command-line 
arguments specifies the number of a file descriptor to be monitored, 
followed by letters indicating the operations for which the descriptor 
is to be checked. The letters we can specify here are <span class="docEmphasis">r</span> (ready for read) and <span class="docEmphasis">w</span> (ready for write).</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EF1IM">Example 63-1. Using <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> to monitor multiple file descriptors</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>altio/t_select.c</b>
#include &lt;sys/time.h&gt;
#include &lt;sys/select.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

static void
usageError(const char *progName)
{
    fprintf(stderr, "Usage: %s {timeout|-} fd-num[rw]...\n", progName);
    fprintf(stderr, "    - means infinite timeout; \n");
    fprintf(stderr, "    r = monitor for read\n");
    fprintf(stderr, "    w = monitor for write\n\n");
    fprintf(stderr, "    e.g.: %s - 0rw 1w\n", progName);
    exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
}
int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    fd_set readfds, writefds;
    int ready, nfds, fd, numRead, j;
    struct timeval timeout;
    struct timeval *pto;
    char buf[10];                       /* Large enough to hold "rw\0" */

    if (argc &lt; 2 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageError(argv[0]);

    /* Timeout for select() is specified in argv[1] */

    if (strcmp(argv[1], "-") == 0) {
        pto = NULL;                     /* Infinite timeout */
    } else {
        pto = &timeout;
        timeout.tv_sec = getLong(argv[1], 0, "timeout");
        timeout.tv_usec = 0;            /* No microseconds */
    }

    /* Process remaining arguments to build file descriptor sets */

    nfds = 0;
    FD_ZERO(&amp;readfds);
    FD_ZERO(&amp;writefds);

    for (j = 2; j &lt; argc; j++) {
        numRead = sscanf(argv[j], "%d%2[rw]", &amp;fd, buf);
        if (numRead != 2)
            usageError(argv[0]);
        if (fd &gt;= FD_SETSIZE)
            cmdLineErr("file descriptor exceeds limit (%d)\n", FD_SETSIZE);

        if (fd &gt;= nfds)
            nfds = fd + 1;              /* Record maximum fd + 1 */
        if (strchr(buf, 'r') != NULL)
            FD_SET(fd, &amp;readfds);
        if (strchr(buf, 'w') != NULL)
            FD_SET(fd, &amp;writefds);
    }

    /* We've built all of the arguments; now call select() */

    ready = select(nfds, &amp;readfds, &amp;writefds, NULL, pto);
                                        /* Ignore exceptional events */
    if (ready == -1)
        errExit("select");

    /* Display results of select() */

    printf("ready = %d\n", ready);
for (fd = 0; fd &lt; nfds; fd++)
        printf("%d: %s%s\n", fd, FD_ISSET(fd, &amp;readfds) ? "r" : "",
                FD_ISSET(fd, &amp;writefds) ? "w" : "");

    if (pto != NULL)
        printf("timeout after select(): %ld.%03ld\n",
               (long) timeout.tv_sec, (long) timeout.tv_usec / 10000);
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
           <b>altio/t_select.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">In the following shell session log, we demonstrate the use of the program in Example 63-1. In the first example, we make a request to monitor file descriptor 0 for input with a 10-second <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span>:</p><pre>$ <b>./t_select 10 0r </b>
<i> Press Enter, so that a line of input is available on file descriptor 0</i>
ready = 1
0: r
timeout after select(): 8.003
$                                         <i> Next shell prompt is displayed</i></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The above output shows us that <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>
 determined that one file descriptor was ready. This was file descriptor
 0, which was ready for reading. We can also see that the <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> was modified. The final line of output, consisting of just the shell <tt>$</tt> prompt, appeared because the <span class="docEmphasis">t_select</span>
 program didn’t read the newline character that made file descriptor 0 
ready, and so that character was read by the shell, which responded by 
printing another prompt.</p><p class="docText">In the next example, we again monitor file descriptor 0 for input, but this time with a <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> of 0 seconds:</p><pre>$ <b>./t_select 0 0r</b>
ready = 0
timeout after select(): 0.000</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> call returned immediately, and found no file descriptor was ready.</p><p class="docText">In
 the next example, we monitor two file descriptors: descriptor 0, to see
 if input is available, and descriptor 1, to see if output is possible. 
In this case, we specify the <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> as <tt>NULL</tt> (the first command-line argument is a hyphen), meaning infinity:</p><pre>$ <b>./t_select - 0r 1w</b>
ready = 1
0:
1: w</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> call returned immediately, informing us that output was possible on file descriptor 1.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ER3IM">63.2.2. The <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> System Call</h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> system call performs a similar task to <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>. The major difference between the two system calls lies in how we specify the file descriptors to be monitored. With <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>, we provide three sets, each marked to indicate the file descriptors of interest. With <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>, we provide a list of file descriptors, each marked with the set of events of interest.</p><pre>#include &lt;poll.h&gt;

int <b>poll</b>(struct pollfd <span class="docEmphasis">fds</span>[], nfds_t <span class="docEmphasis">nfds</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns number of ready file descriptors, 0 on timeout, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">fds</span> argument and the <span class="docEmphasis">pollfd</span> array (<span class="docEmphasis">nfds</span>) specify the file descriptors that <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> is to monitor. The <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> argument can be used to set an upper limit on the time for which <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> will block. We describe each of these arguments in detail below.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EG5IM">63.2.2.1. The <span class="docEmphasis">pollfd</span> array</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">fds</span> argument lists the file descriptors to be monitored by <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>. This argument is an array of <span class="docEmphasis">pollfd</span> structures, defined as follows:</p><pre>struct pollfd {
    int   fd;               /* File descriptor */
    short events;           /* Requested events bit mask */
    short revents;          /* Returned events bit mask */
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">nfds</span> arguments specifies the number of items in the <span class="docEmphasis">fds</span> array. The <span class="docEmphasis">nfds_t</span> data type used to type the <span class="docEmphasis">nfds</span> argument is an unsigned integer type.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">events</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">revents</span> fields of the <span class="docEmphasis">pollfd</span> structure are bit masks. The caller initializes <span class="docEmphasis">events</span> to specify the events to be monitored for the file descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>. Upon return from <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">revents</span> is set to indicate which of those events actually occurred for this file descriptor.</p><p class="docText">Table 63-2 lists the bits that may appear in the <span class="docEmphasis">events</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">revents</span> fields. The first group of bits in this table (<tt>POLLIN</tt>, <tt>POLLRDNORM</tt>, <tt>POLLRDBAND</tt>, <tt>POLLPRI</tt>, and <tt>POLLRDHUP</tt>) are concerned with input events. The next group of bits (<tt>POLLOUT</tt>, <tt>POLLWRNORM</tt>, and <tt>POLLWRBAND</tt>) are concerned with output events. The third group of bits (<tt>POLLERR</tt>, <tt>POLLHUP</tt>, and <tt>POLLNVAL</tt>) are set in the <span class="docEmphasis">revents</span> field to return additional information about the file descriptor. If specified in the <span class="docEmphasis">events</span> field, these three bits are ignored. The final bit (<tt>POLLMSG</tt>) is unused by <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> on Linux.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On UNIX implementations providing STREAMS devices, <tt>POLLMSG</tt> indicates that a message containing a <tt>SIGPOLL</tt> signal has reached the head of the stream. <tt>POLLMSG</tt> is unused on Linux, because Linux doesn’t implement STREAMS.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 63-2. Bit-mask values for <span class="docEmphasis">events</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">revents</span> fields of the <span class="docEmphasis">pollfd</span> structure</h5></caption><colgroup span="4"><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Bit</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Input in <span class="docEmphasis">events</span>?</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Returned in <span class="docEmphasis">revents</span>?</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLIN</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Data other than high-priority data can be read</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLRDNORM</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Equivalent to <tt>POLLIN</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLRDBAND</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Priority data can be read (unused on Linux)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLPRI</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">High-priority data can be read</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLRDHUP</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Shutdown on peer socket</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLOUT</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Normal data can be written</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLWRNORM</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Equivalent to <tt>POLLOUT</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLWRBAND</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Priority data can be written</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLERR</tt></td><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">An error has occurred</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLHUP</tt></td><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A hangup has occurred</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLNVAL</tt></td><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">•</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">File descriptor is not open</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLMSG</tt></td><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Unused on Linux (and unspecified in SUSv3)</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">It is permissible to specify <span class="docEmphasis">events</span> as 0 if we are not interested in events on a particular file descriptor. Furthermore, specifying a negative value for the <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span> field (e.g., negating its value if nonzero) causes the corresponding <span class="docEmphasis">events</span> field to be ignored and the <span class="docEmphasis">revents</span>
 field always to be returned as 0. Either of these techniques can be 
used to (perhaps temporarily) disable monitoring of a single file 
descriptor, without needing to rebuild the entire <span class="docEmphasis">fds</span> list.</p><p class="docText">Note the following further points regarding the Linux implementation of <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Although defined as separate bits, <tt>POLLIN</tt> and <tt>POLLRDNORM</tt> are synonymous.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Although defined as separate bits, <tt>POLLOUT</tt> and <tt>POLLWRNORM</tt> are synonymous.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>POLLRDBAND</tt> is generally unused; that is, it is ignored in the <span class="docEmphasis">events</span> field and not set in <span class="docEmphasis">revents</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The only place where <tt>POLLRDBAND</tt> is set is in code implementing the (obsolete) DECnet networking protocol.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li><li><p class="docList">Although set for sockets in certain circumstances, <tt>POLLWRBAND</tt> conveys no useful information. (There are no circumstances in which <tt>POLLWRBAND</tt> is set when <tt>POLLOUT</tt> and <tt>POLLWRNORM</tt> are not also set.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText"><tt>POLLRDBAND</tt> and <tt>POLLWRBAND</tt>
 are meaningful on implementations that provide System V STREAMS (which 
Linux does not). Under STREAMS, a message can be assigned a nonzero 
priority, and such messages are queued to the receiver in decreasing 
order of priority, in a band ahead of normal (priority 0) messages.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>_XOPEN_SOURCE</tt> feature test macro must be defined in order to obtain the definitions of the constants <tt>POLLRDNORM</tt>, <tt>POLLRDBAND</tt>, <tt>POLLWRNORM</tt>, and <tt>POLLWRBAND</tt> from <tt>&lt;poll.h&gt;</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>POLLRDHUP</tt> is a Linux-specific flag available since kernel 2.6.17. In order to obtain this definition from <tt>&lt;poll.h&gt;</tt>, the <tt>_GNU_SOURCE</tt> feature test macro must be defined.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>POLLNVAL</tt> is returned if the specified file descriptor was closed at the time of the <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> call.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Summarizing the above points, the <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> flags of real interest are <tt>POLLIN</tt>, <tt>POLLOUT</tt>, <tt>POLLPRI</tt>, <tt>POLLRDHUP</tt>, <tt>POLLHUP</tt>, and <tt>POLLERR</tt>. We consider the meanings of these flags in greater detail in Section 63.2.3.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EVUJM">63.2.2.2. The <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> argument</h5><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> argument determines the blocking behavior of <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">If <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> equals -1, block until one of the file descriptors listed in the <span class="docEmphasis">fds</span> array is ready (as defined by the corresponding <span class="docEmphasis">events</span> field) or a signal is caught.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> equals 0, do not block—just perform a check to see which file descriptors are ready.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> is greater than 0, block for up to <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> milliseconds, until one of the file descriptors in <span class="docEmphasis">fds</span> is ready, or until a signal is caught.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">As with <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>, the accuracy of <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> is limited by the granularity of the software clock (Section 10.6), and SUSv3 specifies that <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> is always rounded upward if it is not an exact multiple of the clock granularity.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EXWJM">63.2.2.3. Return value from <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span></h5><p class="docText">As its function result, <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> returns one of the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">A return value of -1 indicates that an error occurred. One possible error is <tt>EINTR</tt>, indicating that the call was interrupted by a signal handler. (As noted in Section 21.5, <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> is never automatically restarted if interrupted by a signal handler.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">A return of 0 means that the call timed out before any file descriptor became ready.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A positive return value indicates that one or more file descriptors are ready. The returned value is the number of <span class="docEmphasis">pollfd</span> structures in the <span class="docEmphasis">fds</span> array that have a nonzero <span class="docEmphasis">revents</span> field.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Note the slightly different meaning of a positive return value from <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> system call counts a file descriptor multiple times if it occurs in more than one returned file descriptor set. The <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>
 system call returns a count of ready file descriptors, and a file 
descriptor is counted only once, even if multiple bits are set in the 
corresponding <span class="docEmphasis">revents</span> field.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EEYJM">63.2.2.4. Example program</h5><p class="docText">Example 63-2 provides a simple demonstration of the use of <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>.
 This program creates a number of pipes (each pipe uses a consecutive 
pair of file descriptors), writes bytes to the write ends of randomly 
selected pipes, and then performs a <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> to see which pipes have data available for reading.</p><p class="docText">The
 following shell session shows an example of what we see when running 
this program. The command-line arguments to the program specify that ten
 pipes should be created, and writes should be made to three randomly 
selected pipes.</p><pre>$ <b>./poll_pipes 10 3</b>
Writing to fd:   4 (read fd:   3)
Writing to fd:  14 (read fd:  13)
Writing to fd:  14 (read fd:  13)
poll() returned: 2
Readable:   3
Readable:  13</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">From the above output, we can see that <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> found two pipes had data available for reading.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EDZJM">Example 63-2. Using <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> to monitor multiple file descriptors</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>altio/poll_pipes.c</b>
#include &lt;time.h&gt;
#include &lt;poll.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int numPipes, j, ready, randPipe, numWrites;
    int (*pfds)[2];                     /* File descriptors for all pipes */
    struct pollfd *pollFd;

    if (argc &lt; 2 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s num-pipes [num-writes]\n", argv[0]);

    /* Allocate the arrays that we use. The arrays are sized according
       to the number of pipes specified on command line */

    numPipes = getInt(argv[1], GN_GT_0, "num-pipes");

    pfds = calloc(numPipes, sizeof(int [2]));
    if (pfds == NULL)
        errExit("malloc");
    pollFd = calloc(numPipes, sizeof(struct pollfd));
    if (pollFd == NULL)
        errExit("malloc");

    /* Create the number of pipes specified on command line */

    for (j = 0; j &lt; numPipes; j++)
        if (pipe(pfds[j]) == -1)
            errExit("pipe %d", j);

    /* Perform specified number of writes to random pipes */

    numWrites = (argc &gt; 2) ? getInt(argv[2], GN_GT_0, "num-writes") : 1;

    srandom((int) time(NULL));
    for (j = 0; j &lt; numWrites; j++) {
        randPipe = random() % numPipes;
        printf("Writing to fd: %3d (read fd: %3d)\n",
                pfds[randPipe][1], pfds[randPipe][0]);
        if (write(pfds[randPipe][1], "a", 1) == -1)
            errExit("write %d", pfds[randPipe][1]);
    }

    /* Build the file descriptor list to be supplied to poll(). This list
       is set to contain the file descriptors for the read ends of all of
       the pipes. */

    for (j = 0; j &lt; numPipes; j++) {
        pollFd[j].fd = pfds[j][0];
        pollFd[j].events = POLLIN;
    }

    ready = poll(pollFd, numPipes, -1);         /* Nonblocking */
    if (ready == -1)
        errExit("poll");

    printf("poll() returned: %d\n", ready);

    /* Check which pipes have data available for reading */

    for (j = 0; j &lt; numPipes; j++)
        if (pollFd[j].revents &amp; POLLIN)
            printf("Readable: %d %3d\n", j, pollFd[j].fd);

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>altio/poll_pipes.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERZJM">63.2.3. When Is a File Descriptor Ready?</h4><p class="docText">Correctly using <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>
 requires an understanding of the conditions under which a file 
descriptor indicates as being ready. SUSv3 says that a file descriptor 
(with <tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt> clear) is considered to be ready if a call to an I/O function would not block, <span class="docEmphasis">regardless of whether the function would actually transfer data</span>. The key point is italicized: <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>
 tell us whether an I/O operation would not block, rather than whether 
it would successfully transfer data. In this light, let us consider how 
these system calls operate for different types of file descriptors. We 
show this information in tables containing two columns:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> column indicates whether a file descriptor is marked as readable (<tt>r</tt>), writable (<tt>w</tt>), or having an exceptional condition (<tt>x</tt>).</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> column indicates the bit(s) returned in the <span class="docEmphasis">revents</span> field. In these tables, we omit mention of <tt>POLLRDNORM</tt>, <tt>POLLWRNORM</tt>, <tt>POLLRDBAND</tt>, and <tt>POLLWRBAND</tt>. Although some of these flags may be returned in <span class="docEmphasis">revents</span> in various circumstances (if they are specified in <span class="docEmphasis">events</span>), they convey no useful information beyond that provided by <tt>POLLIN</tt>, <tt>POLLOUT</tt>, <tt>POLLHUP</tt>, and <tt>POLLERR</tt>.</p></li></ul><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E42JM">63.2.3.1. Regular files</h5><p class="docText">File descriptors that refer to regular files are always marked as readable and writable by <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>, and returned with <tt>POLLIN</tt> and <tt>POLLOUT</tt> set in <span class="docEmphasis">revents</span> for <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>, for the following reasons:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">A <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> will always immediately return data, end-of-file, or an error (e.g., the file was not opened for reading).</p></li><li><p class="docList">A <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> will always immediately transfer data or fail with some error.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">SUSv3 says that <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>
 should also mark a descriptor for a regular file as having an 
exceptional condition (though this has no obvious meaning for regular 
files). Only some implementations do this; Linux is one of those that do
 not.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EB4JM">63.2.3.2. Terminals and pseudoterminals</h5><p class="docText">Table 63-3 summarizes the behavior of <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> for terminals and pseudoterminals (Chapter 64).</p><p class="docText">When one half of a pseudoterminal pair is closed, the <span class="docEmphasis">revents</span> setting returned by <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> for the other half of the pair depends on the implementation. On Linux, at least the <tt>POLLHUP</tt> flag is set. However, other implementations return various flags to indicate this event—for example, <tt>POLLHUP</tt>, <tt>POLLERR</tt>, or <tt>POLLIN</tt>.
 Furthermore, on some implementations, the flags that are set depend on 
whether it is the master or the slave device that is being monitored.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 63-3. <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> indications for terminals and pseudoterminals</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Condition or event</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom"><span class="docEmphasis">select()</span></th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom"><span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Input available</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>r</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLIN</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Output possible</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>w</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLOUT</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">After <span class="docEmphasis">close()</span> by pseudoterminal peer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>rw</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">See text</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Pseudoterminal master in packet mode detects slave state change</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>x</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLPRI</tt></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E1EKM">63.2.3.3. Pipes and FIFOs</h5><p class="docText">Table 63-4 summarizes the details for the read end of a pipe or FIFO. The <span class="docEmphasis">Data in pipe?</span> column indicates whether the pipe has at least 1 byte of data available for reading. In this table, we assume that <tt>POLLIN</tt> was specified in the <span class="docEmphasis">events</span> field for <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>.</p><p class="docText">On some other UNIX implementations, if the write end of a pipe is closed, then, instead of returning with <tt>POLLHUP</tt> set, <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> returns with the <tt>POLLIN</tt> bit set (since a <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>
 will return immediately with end-of-file). Portable applications should
 check to see if either bit is set in order to know if a <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> will block.</p><p class="docText">Table 63-5 summarizes the details for the write end of a pipe. In this table, we assume that <tt>POLLOUT</tt> was specified in the <span class="docEmphasis">events</span> field for <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">Space for PIPE_BUF bytes?</span> column indicates whether the pipe has room to atomically write <tt>PIPE_BUF</tt>
 bytes without blocking. This is the criterion on which Linux considers a
 pipe ready for writing. Some other UNIX implementations use the same 
criterion; others consider a pipe writable if even a single byte can be 
written. (In Linux 2.6.10 and earlier, the capacity of a pipe is the 
same as <tt>PIPE_BUF</tt>. This means that a pipe is considered unwritable if it contains even a single byte of data.)</p><p class="docText">On some other UNIX implementations, if the read end of a pipe is closed, then, instead of returning with <tt>POLLERR</tt> set, <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> returns with either the <tt>POLLOUT</tt> bit or the <tt>POLLHUP</tt> bit set. Portable applications need to check to see if any of these bits is set to determine if a <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> will block.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 63-4. <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> indications for the read end of a pipe or FIFO</h5></caption><colgroup span="4"><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" colspan="2" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom">Condition or event</th><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" rowspan="2" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom"><span class="docEmphasis">select()</span></th><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" rowspan="2" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom"><span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span></th></tr><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Data in pipe?</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Write end open?</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">no</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">no</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>r</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLHUP</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>r</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLIN</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">no</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>r</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLIN | POLLHUP</tt></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 63-5. <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> indications for the write end of a pipe or FIFO</h5></caption><colgroup span="4"><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" colspan="2" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom">Condition or event</th><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" rowspan="2" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom"><span class="docEmphasis">select()</span></th><th align="center" class="docTableCell thead" rowspan="2" scope="col" style="text-align:center" valign="bottom"><span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span></th></tr><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Space for <tt>PIPE_BUF</tt> bytes?</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Read end open?</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">no</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">no</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>w</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLERR</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>w</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLOUT</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">no</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>w</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLOUT | POLLERR</tt></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EHOKM">63.2.3.4. Sockets</h5><p class="docText">Table 63-6 summarizes the behavior of <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> for sockets. For the <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> column, we assume that <span class="docEmphasis">events</span> was specified as <tt>(POLLIN | POLLOUT | POLLPRI)</tt>. For the <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>
 column, we assume that the file descriptor is being tested to see if 
input is possible, output is possible, or an exceptional condition 
occurred (i.e., the file descriptor is specified in all three sets 
passed to <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>). This table covers just the common cases, not all possible scenarios.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The Linux <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> behavior for UNIX domain sockets after a peer <span class="docEmphasis">close()</span> differs from that shown in Table 63-6. As well as the other flags, <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> additionally returns <tt>POLLHUP</tt> in <span class="docEmphasis">revents</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 63-6. <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> indications for sockets</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Condition or event</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom"><span class="docEmphasis">select()</span></th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom"><span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Input available</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>r</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLIN</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Output possible</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>w</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLOUT</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Incoming connection established on listening socket</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>r</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLIN</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Out-of-band data received (TCP only)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>x</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLPRI</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Stream socket peer closed connection or executed <span class="docEmphasis">shutdown(SHUT_WR)</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>rw</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLIN | POLLOUT | POLLRDHUP</tt></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">The Linux-specific <tt>POLLRDHUP</tt> flag (available since Linux 2.6.17) needs a little further explanation. This flag—actually in the form of <tt>EPOLLRDHUP</tt>—is designed primarily for use with the edge-triggered mode of the <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>
 API (Section 63.4). It is returned when the remote end of a stream 
socket connection has shut down the writing half of the connection. The 
use of this flag allows an application that uses the <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>
 edge-triggered interface to employ simpler code to recognize a remote 
shutdown. (The alternative is for the application to note that the <tt>POLLIN</tt> flag is set and then perform a <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>, which indicates the remote shutdown with a return of 0.)</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EOWKM">63.2.4. Comparison of <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span></h4><p class="docText">In this section, we consider some similarities and differences between <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ETXKM">63.2.4.1. Implementation details</h5><p class="docText">Within the Linux kernel, <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> both employ the same set of kernel-internal <span class="docEmphasis">poll</span> routines. These <span class="docEmphasis">poll</span> routines are distinct from the <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>
 system call itself. Each routine returns information about the 
readiness of a single file descriptor. This readiness information takes 
the form of a bit mask whose values correspond to the bits returned in 
the <span class="docEmphasis">revents</span> field by the <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> system call (Table 63-2). The implementation of the <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> system call involves calling the kernel <span class="docEmphasis">poll</span> routine for each file descriptor and placing the resulting information in the corresponding <span class="docEmphasis">revents</span> field.</p><p class="docText">To implement <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>, a set of macros is used to convert the information returned by the kernel <span class="docEmphasis">poll</span> routines into the corresponding event types returned by <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>:</p><pre>#define POLLIN_SET  (POLLRDNORM | POLLRDBAND | POLLIN | POLLHUP | POLLERR)
                                     /* Ready for reading */
#define POLLOUT_SET (POLLWRBAND | POLLWRNORM | POLLOUT | POLLERR)
                                     /* Ready for writing */
#define POLLEX_SET  (POLLPRI)        /* Exceptional condition */</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">These macro definitions reveal the semantic correspondence between the information returned by <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>. (If we look at the <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> columns in the tables in Section 63.2.3,
 we see that the indications provided by each system call are consistent
 with the above macros.) The only additional information we need to 
complete the picture is that <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> returns <tt>POLLNVAL</tt> in the <span class="docEmphasis">revents</span> field if one of the monitored file descriptors was closed at the time of the call, while <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> returns -1 with <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> set to <tt>EBADF</tt>.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EYZKM">63.2.4.2. API differences</h5><p class="docText">The following are some differences between the <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> APIs:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The use of the <span class="docEmphasis">fd_set</span> data type places an upper limit (<tt>FD_SETSIZE</tt>) on the range of file descriptors that can be monitored by <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>. By default, this limit is 1024 on Linux, and changing it requires recompiling the application. By contrast, <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> places no intrinsic limit on the range of file descriptors that can be monitored.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Because the <span class="docEmphasis">fd_set</span> arguments of <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> are value-result, we must reinitialize them if making repeated <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> calls from within a loop. By using separate <span class="docEmphasis">events</span> (input) and <span class="docEmphasis">revents</span> (output) fields, <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> avoids this requirement.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">timeout</span> precision afforded by <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> (microseconds) is greater than that afforded by <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>
 (milliseconds). (The accuracy of the timeouts of both of these system 
calls is nevertheless limited by the software clock granularity.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">If one of the file descriptors being monitored was closed, then <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> informs us exactly which one, via the <tt>POLLNVAL</tt> bit in the corresponding <span class="docEmphasis">revents</span> field. By contrast, <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> merely returns -1 with <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> set to <tt>EBADF</tt>,
 leaving us to determine which file descriptor is closed by checking for
 an error when performing an I/O system call on the descriptor. However,
 this is typically not an important difference, since an application can
 usually keep track of which file descriptors it has closed.</p></li></ul><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E52KM">63.2.4.3. Portability</h5><p class="docText">Historically, <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> was more widely available than <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>.
 Nowadays, both interfaces are standardized by SUSv3 and widely 
available on contemporary implementations. However, there is some 
variation in the behavior of <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> across implementations, as noted in Section 63.2.3.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EV3KM">63.2.4.4. Performance</h5><p class="docText">The performance of <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> is similar if either of the following is true:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The range of file descriptors to be monitored is small (i.e., the maximum file descriptor number is low).</p></li><li><p class="docList">A
 large number of file descriptors are being monitored, but they are 
densely packed (i.e., most or all of the file descriptors from 0 up to 
some limit are being monitored).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">However, the performance of <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>
 can differ noticeably if the set of file descriptors to be monitored is
 sparse; that is, the maximum file descriptor number, N, is large, but 
only one or a few descriptors in the range 0 to <span class="docEmphasis">N</span> are being monitored. In this case, <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> can perform better than <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>. We can understand the reasons for this by considering the arguments passed to the two system calls. With <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>, we pass one or more file descriptor sets and an integer, <span class="docEmphasis">nfds</span>, which is one greater than the maximum file descriptor to be examined in each set. The <span class="docEmphasis">nfds</span> argument has the same value, regardless of whether we are monitoring all file descriptors in the range 0 to <span class="docEmphasis">(nfds - 1)</span> or only the descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">(nfds - 1)</span>. In both cases, the kernel must examine <span class="docEmphasis">nfds</span> elements in each set in order to check exactly which file descriptors are to be monitored. By contrast, when using <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>, we specify only the file descriptors of interest to us, and the kernel checks only those descriptors.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The difference in performance for <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>
 with sparse descriptor sets was quite significant in Linux 2.4. Some 
optimizations in Linux 2.6 have narrowed the performance gap 
considerably.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">We consider the performance of <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> further in Section 63.4.5, where we compare the performance of these system calls against <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EU5KM">63.2.5. Problems with <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span></h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>
 system calls are the portable, long-standing, and widely used methods 
of monitoring multiple file descriptors for readiness. However, these 
APIs suffer some problems when monitoring a large number of file 
descriptors:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">On each call to <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>,
 the kernel must check all of the specified file descriptors to see if 
they are ready. When monitoring a large number of file descriptors that 
are in a densely packed range, the time required for this operation 
greatly outweighs the time required for the next two operations.</p></li><li><p class="docList">In each call to <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>,
 the program must pass a data structure to the kernel describing all of 
the file descriptors to be monitored, and, after checking the 
descriptors, the kernel returns a modified version of this data 
structure to the program. (Furthermore, for <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>, we must initialize the data structure before each call.) For <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>,
 the size of the data structure increases with the number of file 
descriptors being monitored, and the task of copying it from user to 
kernel space and back again consumes a noticeable amount of CPU time 
when monitoring many file descriptors. For <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>, the size of the data structure is fixed by <tt>FD_SETSIZE</tt>, regardless of the number of file descriptors being monitored.</p></li><li><p class="docList">After the call to <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>, the program must inspect every element of the returned data structure to see which file descriptors are ready.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The consequence of the above points is that the CPU time required by <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> increases with the number of file descriptors being monitored (see Section 63.4.5 for more details). This creates problems for programs that monitor large numbers of file descriptors.</p><p class="docText">The poor scaling performance of <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>
 stems from a simple limitation of these APIs: typically, a program 
makes repeated calls to monitor the same set of file descriptors; 
however, the kernel doesn’t remember the list of file descriptors to be 
monitored between successive calls.</p><p class="docText">Signal-driven I/O and <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>,
 which we examine in the following sections, are both mechanisms that 
allow the kernel to record a persistent list of file descriptors in 
which a process is interested. Doing this eliminates the performance 
scaling problems of <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>,
 yielding solutions that scale according to the number of I/O events 
that occur, rather than according to the number of file descriptors 
being monitored. Consequently, signal-driven I/O and <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span> provide superior performance when monitoring large numbers of file descriptors.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
