<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>63.3. Signal-Driven I/O</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">63.3. Signal-Driven I/O</h3><p class="docText">With I/O multiplexing, a process makes a system call (<span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>)
 in order to check whether I/O is possible on a file descriptor. With 
signal-driven I/O, a process requests that the kernel send it a signal 
when I/O is possible on a file descriptor. The process can then perform 
any other activity until I/O is possible, at which time the signal is 
delivered to the process. To use signal-driven I/O, a program performs 
the following steps:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Establish a handler for the signal delivered by the signal-driven I/O mechanism. By default, this notification signal is <tt>SIGIO</tt>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Set the <span class="docEmphasis">owner</span>
 of the file descriptor—that is, the process or process group that is to
 receive signals when I/O is possible on the file descriptor. Typically,
 we make the calling process the owner. The owner is set using an <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> <tt>F_SETOWN</tt> operation of the following form:</p><pre>fcntl(fd, F_SETOWN, pid);</pre><br/>
</div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Enable nonblocking I/O by setting the <tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt> open file status flag.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Enable signal-driven I/O by turning on the <tt>O_ASYNC</tt> open file status flag. This can be combined with the previous step, since they both require the use of the <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> <tt>F_SETFL</tt> operation (Section 5.3), as in the following example:</p><pre>flags = fcntl(fd, F_GETFL);                 /* Get current flags */
fcntl(fd, F_SETFL, flags | O_ASYNC | O_NONBLOCK);</pre><br/>
</div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The
 calling process can now perform other tasks. When I/O becomes possible,
 the kernel generates a signal for the process and invokes the signal 
handler established in step 1.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Signal-driven I/O provides edge-triggered notification (Section 63.1.1).
 This means that once the process has been notified that I/O is 
possible, it should perform as much I/O (e.g., read as many bytes) as 
possible. Assuming a nonblocking file descriptor, this means executing a
 loop that performs I/O system calls until a call fails with the error <tt>EAGAIN</tt> or <tt>EWOULDBLOCK</tt>.</p></div></li></ol></div><p class="docText">On
 Linux 2.4 and earlier, signal-driven I/O can be employed with file 
descriptors for sockets, terminals, pseudoterminals, and certain other 
types of devices. Linux 2.6 additionally allows signal-driven I/O to be 
employed with pipes and FIFOs. Since Linux 2.6.25, signal-driven I/O can
 also be used with <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> file descriptors.</p><p class="docText">In
 the following pages, we first present an example of the use of 
signal-driven I/O, and then explain some of the above steps in greater 
detail.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Historically, signal-driven I/O was sometimes referred to as <span class="docEmphasis">asynchronous I/O</span>, and this is reflected in the name (<tt>O_ASYNC</tt>) of the associated open file status flag. However, nowadays, the term <span class="docEmphasis">asynchronous I/O</span>
 is used to refer to the type of functionality provided by the POSIX AIO
 specification. Using POSIX AIO, a process requests the kernel to 
perform an I/O operation, and the kernel <span class="docEmphasis">initiates</span>
 the operation, but immediately passes control back to the calling 
process; the process is then later notified when the I/O operation 
completes or an error occurs.</p><p class="docText"><tt>O_ASYNC</tt>
 was specified in POSIX.1g, but was not included in SUSv3 because the 
specification of the required behavior for this flag was deemed 
insufficient.</p><p class="docText">Several UNIX implementations, especially older ones, don’t define the <tt>O_ASYNC</tt> constant for use with <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>. Instead, the constant is named <tt>FASYNC</tt>, and <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> defines this latter name as a synonym for <tt>O_ASYNC</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4OIM">63.3.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EBPIM">63.3.1.1. Example program</h5><p class="docText">Example 63-3
 provides a simple example of the use of signal-driven I/O. This program
 performs the steps described above for enabling signal-driven I/O on 
standard input, and then places the terminal in cbreak mode (Section 62.6.3),
 so that input is available a character at a time. The program then 
enters an infinite loop, performing the “work” of incrementing a 
variable, <span class="docEmphasis">cnt</span>, while waiting for input to become available. Whenever input becomes available, the <tt>SIGIO</tt> handler sets a flag, <span class="docEmphasis">gotSigio</span>,
 that is monitored by the main program. When the main program sees that 
this flag is set, it reads all available input characters and prints 
them along with the current value of <span class="docEmphasis">cnt</span>. If a hash character (<tt>#</tt>) is read in the input, the program terminates.</p><p class="docText">Here is an example of what we see when we run this program and type the <span class="docEmphasis">x</span> character a number of times, followed by a hash (<tt>#</tt>) character:</p><pre>$ <b>./demo_sigio</b>
cnt=37; read x
cnt=100; read x
cnt=159; read x
cnt=223; read x
cnt=288; read x
cnt=333; read #</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EPQIM">Example 63-3. Using signal-driven I/O on a terminal</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>altio/demo_sigio.c</b>
#include &lt;signal.h&gt;
#include &lt;ctype.h&gt;
#include &lt;fcntl.h&gt;
#include &lt;termios.h&gt;
#include "tty_functions.h"      /* Declaration of ttySetCbreak() */
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

static volatile sig_atomic_t gotSigio = 0;
                                /* Set nonzero on receipt of SIGIO */

static void
sigioHandler(int sig)
{
    gotSigio = 1;
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int flags, j, cnt;
    struct termios origTermios;
    char ch;
    struct sigaction sa;
    Boolean done;

    /* Establish handler for "I/O possible" signal */

    sigemptyset(&amp;sa.sa_mask);
    sa.sa_flags = SA_RESTART;
    sa.sa_handler = sigioHandler;
    if (sigaction(SIGIO, &amp;sa, NULL) == -1)
        errExit("sigaction");

    /* Set owner process that is to receive "I/O possible" signal */

    if (fcntl(STDIN_FILENO, F_SETOWN, getpid()) == -1)
        errExit("fcntl(F_SETOWN)");

    /* Enable "I/O possible" signaling and make I/O nonblocking
       for file descriptor */

    flags = fcntl(STDIN_FILENO, F_GETFL);
    if (fcntl(STDIN_FILENO, F_SETFL, flags | O_ASYNC | O_NONBLOCK) == -1)
        errExit("fcntl(F_SETFL)");

    /* Place terminal in cbreak mode */

    if (ttySetCbreak(STDIN_FILENO, &amp;origTermios) == -1)
        errExit("ttySetCbreak");

    for (done = FALSE, cnt = 0; !done ; cnt++) {
        for (j = 0; j &lt; 100000000; j++)
            continue;                   /* Slow main loop down a little */

        if (gotSigio) {                 /* Is input available? */

            /* Read all available input until error (probably EAGAIN)
               or EOF (not actually possible in cbreak mode) or a
               hash (#) character is read */

            while (read(STDIN_FILENO, &amp;ch, 1) &gt; 0 &amp;&amp; !done) {
                printf("cnt=%d; read %c\n", cnt, ch);
                done = ch == '#';
            }

            gotSigio = 0;
        }
    }

    /* Restore original terminal settings */

    if (tcsetattr(STDIN_FILENO, TCSAFLUSH, &amp;origTermios) == -1)
        errExit("tcsetattr");
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
     <b>altio/demo_sigio.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E1QIM">63.3.1.2. Establish the signal handler before enabling signal-driven I/O</h5><p class="docText">Because the default action of <tt>SIGIO</tt> is to terminate the process, we should enable the handler for <tt>SIGIO</tt> before enabling signal-driven I/O on a file descriptor. If we enable signal-driven I/O before establishing the <tt>SIGIO</tt> handler, then there is a time window during which, if I/O becomes possible, delivery of <tt>SIGIO</tt> will terminate the process.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On some UNIX implementations, <tt>SIGIO</tt> is ignored by default.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EURIM">63.3.1.3. Setting the file descriptor owner</h5><p class="docText">We set the file descriptor owner using an <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> operation of the following form:</p><pre>fcntl(fd, F_SETOWN, pid);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We may specify that either a 
single process or all of the processes in a process group are to be 
signaled when I/O is possible on the file descriptor. If <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> is positive, it is interpreted as a process ID. If <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> is negative, its absolute value specifies a process group ID.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On older UNIX implementations, an <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> operation—either <tt>FIOSETOWN</tt> or <tt>SIOCSPGRP</tt>—was used to achieve the same effect as <tt>F_SETOWN</tt>. For compatibility, these <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> operations are also provided on Linux.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Typically, <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span>
 is specified as the process ID of the calling process (so that the 
signal is sent to the process that has the file descriptor open). 
However, it is possible to specify another process or a process group 
(e.g., the caller’s process group), and signals will be sent to that 
target, subject to the permission checks described in Section 20.5, 
where the sending process is considered to be the process that does the <tt>F_SETOWN</tt>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> <tt>F_GETOWN</tt>
 operation returns the ID of the process or process group that is to 
receive signals when I/O is possible on a specified file descriptor:</p><pre>id = fcntl(fd, F_GETOWN);
if (id == -1)
    errExit("fcntl");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">A process group ID is returned as a negative number by this call.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> operation that corresponds to <tt>F_GETOWN</tt> on older UNIX implementations was <tt>FIOGETOWN</tt> or <tt>SIOCGPGRP</tt>. Both of these <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> operations are also provided on Linux.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">A
 limitation in the system call convention employed on some Linux 
architectures (notably, x86) means that if a file descriptor is owned by
 a process group ID less than 4096, then, instead of returning that ID 
as a negative function result from the <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> <tt>F_GETOWN</tt> operation, <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> misinterprets it as a system call error. Consequently, the <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> wrapper function returns -1, and <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>
 contains the (positive) process group ID. This is a consequence of the 
fact that the kernel system call interface indicates errors by returning
 a negative <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>
 value as a function result, and there are a few cases where it is 
necessary to distinguish such results from a successful call that 
returns a valid negative value. To make this distinction, <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> interprets negative system call returns in the range -1 to -4095 as indicating an error, copies this (absolute) value into <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>,
 and returns -1 as the function result for the application program. This
 technique is generally sufficient for dealing with the few system call 
service routines that can return a valid negative result; the <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> <tt>F_GETOWN</tt>
 operation is the only practical case where it fails. This limitation 
means that an application that uses process groups to receive “I/O 
possible” signals (which is unusual) can’t reliably use <tt>F_GETOWN</tt> to discover which process group owns a file descriptor.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Since <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> version 2.11, the <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> wrapper function fixes the problem of <tt>F_GETOWN</tt> with process group IDs less than 4096. It does this by implementing <tt>F_GETOWN</tt> in user space using the <tt>F_GETOWN_EX</tt> operation (Section 63.3.2), which is provided by Linux 2.6.32 and later.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EZWIM">63.3.2. When Is "I/O Possible" Signaled?</h4><p class="docText">We now consider the details of when “I/O possible” is signaled for various file types.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ENXIM">63.3.2.1. Terminals and pseudoterminals</h5><p class="docText">For
 terminals and pseudoterminals, a signal is generated whenever new input
 becomes available, even if previous input has not yet been read. “Input
 possible” is also signaled if an end-of-file condition occurs on a 
terminal (but not on a pseudoterminal).</p><p class="docText">There is no “output possible” signaling for terminals. A terminal disconnect is also not signaled.</p><p class="docText">Starting
 with kernel 2.4.19, Linux provides “output possible” signaling for the 
slave side of a pseudoterminal. This signal is generated whenever input 
is consumed on the master side of the pseudoterminal.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EUXIM">63.3.2.2. Pipes and FIFOs</h5><p class="docText">For the read end of a pipe or FIFO, a signal is generated in these circumstances:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Data is written to the pipe (even if there was already unread input available).</p></li><li><p class="docList">The write end of the pipe is closed.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">For the write end of a pipe or FIFO, a signal is generated in these circumstances:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">A read from the pipe increases the amount of free space in the pipe so that it is now possible to write <tt>PIPE_BUF</tt> bytes without blocking.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The read end of the pipe is closed.</p></li></ul><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EIYIM">63.3.2.3. Sockets</h5><p class="docText">Signal-driven
 I/O works for datagram sockets in both the UNIX and the Internet 
domains. A signal is generated in the following circumstances:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">An input datagram arrives on the socket (even if there were already unread datagrams waiting to be read).</p></li><li><p class="docList">An asynchronous error occurs on the socket.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Signal-driven
 I/O works for stream sockets in both the UNIX and the Internet domains.
 A signal is generated in the following circumstances:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">A new connection is received on a listening socket.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A TCP <span class="docEmphasis">connect()</span> request completes; that is, the active end of a TCP connection entered the ESTABLISHED state, as shown in Figure 61-5 (page 1272). The analogous condition is not signaled for UNIX domain sockets.</p></li><li><p class="docList">New input is received on the socket (even if there was already unread input available).</p></li><li><p class="docList">The peer closes its writing half of the connection using <span class="docEmphasis">shutdown()</span>, or closes its socket altogether using <span class="docEmphasis">close()</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Output is possible on the socket (e.g., space has become available in the socket send buffer).</p></li><li><p class="docList">An asynchronous error occurs on the socket.</p></li></ul><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EZZIM">63.3.2.4. <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> file descriptors</h5><p class="docText">A signal is generated when the <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> file descriptor becomes readable—that is, when an event occurs for one of the files monitored by the <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> file descriptor.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EA2IM">63.3.3. Refining the Use of Signal-Driven I/O</h4><p class="docText">In
 applications that need to simultaneously monitor very large numbers 
(i.e., thousands) of file descriptors—for example, certain types of 
network servers—signal-driven I/O can provide significant performance 
advantages by comparison with <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>.
 Signal-driven I/O offers superior performance because the kernel 
“remembers” the list of file descriptors to be monitored, and signals 
the program only when I/O events actually occur on those descriptors. As
 a result, the performance of a program employing signal-driven I/O 
scales according to the number of I/O events that occur, rather than the
 number of file descriptors being monitored.</p><p class="docText">To take full advantage of signal-driven I/O, we must perform two steps:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Employ a Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> operation, <tt>F_SETSIG</tt>, to specify a realtime signal that should be delivered instead of <tt>SIGIO</tt> when I/O is possible on a file descriptor.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Specify the <tt>SA_SIGINFO</tt> flag when using <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span> to establish the handler for the realtime signal employed in the previous step (see Section 21.4).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> <tt>F_SETSIG</tt> operation specifies an alternative signal that should be delivered instead of <tt>SIGIO</tt> when I/O is possible on a file descriptor:</p><pre>if (fcntl(fd, F_SETSIG, sig) == -1)
    errExit("fcntl");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>F_GETSIG</tt> operation performs the converse of <tt>F_SETSIG</tt>, retrieving the signal currently set for a file descriptor:</p><pre>sig = fcntl(fd, F_GETSIG);
if (sig == -1)
    errExit("fcntl");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">(In order to obtain the definitions of the <tt>F_SETSIG</tt> and <tt>F_GETSIG</tt> constants from <tt>&lt;fcntl.h&gt;</tt>, we must define the <tt>_GNU_SOURCE</tt> feature test macro.)</p><p class="docText">Using <tt>F_SETSIG</tt>
 to change the signal used for “I/O possible” notification serves two 
purposes, both of which are needed if we are monitoring large numbers of
 I/O events on multiple file descriptors:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The default “I/O possible” signal, <tt>SIGIO</tt>, is one of the standard, nonqueuing signals. If multiple I/O events are signaled while <tt>SIGIO</tt> is blocked—perhaps because the <tt>SIGIO</tt> handler is already invoked—all notifications except the first will be lost. If we use <tt>F_SETSIG</tt> to specify a realtime signal as the “I/O possible” signal, multiple notifications can be queued.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If the handler for the signal is established using a <span class="docEmphasis">sigaction()</span> call in which the <tt>SA_SIGINFO</tt> flag is specified in the <span class="docEmphasis">sa.sa_flags</span> field, then a <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span>
 structure is passed as the second argument to the signal handler 
(Section 21.4). This structure contains fields identifying the file 
descriptor on which the event occurred, as well as the type of event.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Note that the use of <span class="docEmphasis">both</span> <tt>F_SETSIG</tt> and <tt>SA_SIGINFO</tt> is required in order for a valid <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span> structure to be passed to the signal handler.</p><p class="docText">If we perform an <tt>F_SETSIG</tt> operation specifying <span class="docEmphasis">sig</span> as 0, then we return to the default behavior: <tt>SIGIO</tt> is delivered, and a <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span> argument is not supplied to the handler.</p><p class="docText">For an “I/O possible” event, the fields of interest in the <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span> structure passed to the signal handler are as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">si_signo</span>:
 the number of the signal that caused the invocation of the handler. 
This value is the same as the first argument to the signal handler.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">si_fd</span>: the file descriptor for which the I/O event occurred.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">si_code</span>:
 a code indicating the type of event that occurred. The values that can 
appear in this field, along with their general descriptions, are shown 
in Table 63-7.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">si_band</span>: a bit mask containing the same bits as are returned in the <span class="docEmphasis">revents</span> field by the <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> system call. The value set in <span class="docEmphasis">si_code</span> has a one-to-one correspondence with the bit-mask setting in <span class="docEmphasis">si_band</span>, as shown in Table 63-7.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="90%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 63-7. <span class="docEmphasis">si_code</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">si_band</span> values in the <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span> structure for "I/O possible" events</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom"><span class="docEmphasis">si_code</span></th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom"><span class="docEmphasis">si_band</span> mask value</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLL_IN</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLIN | POLLRDNORM</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Input available; end-of-file condition</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLL_OUT</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLOUT | POLLWRNORM | POLLWRBAND</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Output possible</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLL_MSG</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLIN | POLLRDNORM | POLLMSG</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Input message available (unused)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLL_ERR</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLERR</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">I/O error</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLL_PRI</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLPRI | POLLRDNORM</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">High-priority input available</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLL_HUP</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>POLLHUP | POLLERR</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Hangup occurred</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/></li></ul><p class="docText">In an application that is purely input-driven, we can further refine the use of <tt>F_SETSIG</tt>.
 Instead of monitoring I/O events via a signal handler, we can block the
 nominated “I/O possible” signal, and then accept the queued signals via
 calls to <span class="docEmphasis">sigwaitinfo()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">sigtimedwait()</span> (Section 22.10). These system calls return a <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span> structure that contains the same information as is passed to a signal handler established with <tt>SA_SIGINFO</tt>.
 Accepting signals in this manner returns us to a synchronous model of 
event processing, but with the advantage that we are much more 
efficiently notified about the file descriptors on which I/O events have
 occurred than if we use <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E6IJM">63.3.3.1. Handling signal-queue overflow</h5><p class="docText">We
 saw in Section 22.8 that there is a limit on the number of realtime 
signals that may be queued. If this limit is reached, the kernel reverts
 to delivering the default <tt>SIGIO</tt> signal 
for “I/O possible” notifications. This informs the process that a 
signal-queue overflow occurred. When this happens, we lose information 
about which file descriptors have I/O events, because <tt>SIGIO</tt> is not queued. (Furthermore, the <tt>SIGIO</tt> handler doesn’t receive a <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span> argument, which means that the signal handler can’t determine the file descriptor that generated the signal.)</p><p class="docText">We
 can reduce the likelihood of signal-queue overflows by increasing the 
limit on the number of realtime signals that can be queued, as described
 in Section 22.8. However, this doesn’t eliminate the need to handle the
 possibility of an overflow. A properly designed application using <tt>F_SETSIG</tt> to establish a realtime signal as the “I/O possible” notification mechanism must also establish a handler for <tt>SIGIO</tt>. If <tt>SIGIO</tt> is delivered, then the application can drain the queue of realtime signals using <span class="docEmphasis">sigwaitinfo()</span> and temporarily revert to the use of <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> to obtain a complete list of file descriptors with outstanding I/O events.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ERLJM">63.3.3.2. Using signal-driven I/O with multithreaded applications</h5><p class="docText">Starting with kernel 2.6.32, Linux provides two new, nonstandard <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> operations that can be used to set the target for “I/O possible” signals: <tt>F_SETOWN_EX</tt> and <tt>F_GETOWN_EX</tt>.</p><p class="docText">The <tt>F_SETOWN_EX</tt> operation is like <tt>F_SETOWN</tt>,
 but as well as allowing the target to be specified as a process or 
process group, it also permits a thread to be specified as the target 
for “I/O possible” signals. For this operation, the third argument of <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> is a pointer to a structure of the following form:</p><pre>struct f_owner_ex {
    int   type;
    pid_t pid;
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">type</span> field defines the meaning of the <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> field, and has one of the following values:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">F_OWNER_PGRP</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> field specifies the ID of a process group that is to be the target of “I/O possible” signals. Unlike with <tt>F_SETOWN</tt>, a process group ID is specified as a positive value.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">F_OWNER_PID</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> field specifies the ID of a process that is to be the target of “I/O possible” signals.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">F_OWNER_TID</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> field specifies the ID of a thread that is to be the target of “I/O possible” signals. The ID specified in <span class="docEmphasis">pid</span> is a value returned by <span class="docEmphasis">clone()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">gettid()</span>.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">The <tt>F_GETOWN_EX</tt> operation is the converse of the <tt>F_GETOWN_EX</tt> operation. It uses the <span class="docEmphasis">f_owner_ex</span> structure pointed to by the third argument of <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span> to return the settings defined by a previous <tt>F_SETOWN_EX</tt> operation.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Because the <tt>F_SETOWN_EX</tt> and <tt>F_GETOWN_EX</tt> operations represent process group IDs as positive values, <tt>F_GETOWN_EX</tt> doesn’t suffer the problem described earlier for <tt>F_GETOWN</tt> when using process group IDs less than 4096.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
