<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>63.6. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">63.6. Summary</h3><p class="docText">In this chapter, we explored various alternatives to the standard model for performing I/O: I/O multiplexing (<span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>), signal-driven I/O, and the Linux-specific <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>
 API. All of these mechanisms allow us to monitor multiple file 
descriptors to see if I/O is possible on any of them. None of these 
mechanisms actually performs I/O. Instead, once we have determined that a
 file descriptor is ready, we use the traditional I/O system calls to 
perform the I/O.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>
 I/O multiplexing calls simultaneously monitor multiple file descriptors
 to see if I/O is possible on any of the descriptors. With both system 
calls, we pass a complete list of to-be-checked file descriptors to the 
kernel on each system call, and the kernel returns a modified list 
indicating which descriptors are ready. The fact that complete file 
descriptor lists are passed and checked on each call means that <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> perform poorly when monitoring large numbers of file descriptors.</p><p class="docText">Signal-driven
 I/O allows a process to receive a signal when I/O is possible on a file
 descriptor. To enable signal-driven I/O, we must establish a handler 
for the <tt>SIGIO</tt> signal, set the owner process that is to receive the signal, and enable signal generation by setting the <tt>O_ASYNC</tt>
 open file status flag. This mechanism offers significant performance 
benefits over I/O multiplexing when monitoring large numbers of file 
descriptors. Linux allows us to change the signal used for notification,
 and if we instead employ a realtime signal, then multiple notifications
 can be queued, and the signal handler can use its <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span> argument to determine the file descriptor and event type that generated the signal.</p><p class="docText">Like signal-driven I/O, <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span> offers superior performance when monitoring large numbers of file descriptors. The performance advantage of <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>
 (and signal-driven I/O) derives from the fact that the kernel 
“remembers” the list of file descriptors that a process is monitoring 
(by contrast with <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>, where each system call must again tell the kernel which file descriptors to check). The <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>
 API has some notable advantages over the use of signal-driven I/O: we 
avoid the complexities of dealing with signals and can specify which 
types of I/O events (e.g., input or output) are to be monitored.</p><p class="docText">In
 the course of this chapter, we drew a distinction between 
level-triggered and edge-triggered readiness notification. With a 
level-triggered notification model, we are informed whether I/O is 
currently possible on a file descriptor. By contrast, edge-triggered 
notification informs us whether I/O activity has occurred on a file 
descriptor since it was last monitored. The I/O multiplexing system 
calls offer a level-triggered notification model; signal-driven I/O 
approximates to an edge-triggered model; and <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>
 is capable of operating under either model (level-triggered is the 
default). Edge-triggered notification is usually employed in conjunction
 with nonblocking I/O.</p><p class="docText">We 
concluded the chapter by looking at a problem that sometimes faces 
programs that monitor multiple file descriptors: how to simultaneously 
also wait for the delivery of a signal. The usual solution to this 
problem is the so-called self-pipe trick, whereby a handler for the 
signal writes a byte to a pipe whose read end is included among the set 
of monitored file descriptors. SUSv3 specifies <span class="docEmphasis">pselect()</span>, a variation of <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> that provides another solution to this problem. However, <span class="docEmphasis">pselect()</span> is not available on all UNIX implementations. Linux also provides the analogous (but nonstandard) <span class="docEmphasis">ppoll()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">epoll_pwait()</span>.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6XIM">63.6.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EDYIM">63.6.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">[Stevens
 et al., 2004] describes I/O multiplexing and signal-driven I/O, with 
particular emphasis on the use of these mechanisms with sockets. [Gammo 
et al, 2004] is a paper comparing the performance of <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span>.</p><p class="docText">A particularly interesting online resource is at http://www.kegel.com/c10k.html.
 Written by Dan Kegel, and entitled “The C10K problem,” this web page 
explores the issues facing developers of web servers designed to 
simultaneously serve tens of thousands of clients. The web page includes
 a host of links to related information.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
