<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>63.7. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">63.7. Exercises</h3><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Modify the program in Example 63-2 <tt>(poll_pipes.c)</tt> to use <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> instead of <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write an <span class="docEmphasis">echo</span> server (see Section 60.2 and Section 60.3)
 that handles both TCP and UDP clients. To do this, the server must 
create both a listening TCP socket and a UDP socket, and then monitor 
both sockets using one of the techniques described in this chapter.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Section 63.5 noted that <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>
 can’t be used to wait on both signals and file descriptors, and 
described a solution using a signal handler and a pipe. A related 
problem exists when a program needs to wait for input on both a file 
descriptor and a System V message queue (since System V message queues 
don’t use file descriptors). One solution is to fork a separate child 
process that copies each message from the queue to a pipe included among
 the file descriptors monitored by the parent. Write a program that uses
 this scheme with <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> to monitor input from both the terminal and a message queue.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The last step of the description of the self-pipe technique in Section 63.5.2
 stated that the program should first drain the pipe, and then perform 
any actions that should be taken in response to the signal. What might 
happen if these substeps were reversed?</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Modify the program in Example 63-9 (<tt>self_pipe.c</tt>) to use <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> instead of <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write a program that uses <span class="docEmphasis">epoll_create()</span> to create an <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span> instance and then immediately waits on the returned file descriptor using <span class="docEmphasis">epoll_wait()</span>. When, as in this case, <span class="docEmphasis">epoll_wait()</span> is given an <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span> file descriptor with an empty interest list, what happens? Why might this be useful?</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Suppose we have an <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span> file descriptor that is monitoring multiple file descriptors, all of which are always ready. If we perform a series of <span class="docEmphasis">epoll_wait()</span> calls in which <span class="docEmphasis">maxevents</span> is much smaller than the number of ready file descriptors (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">maxevents</span> is 1), without performing all possible I/O on the ready descriptors between calls, what descriptor(s) does <span class="docEmphasis">epoll_wait()</span>
 return in each call? Write a program to determine the answer. (For the 
purposes of this experiment, it suffices to perform no I/O between the <span class="docEmphasis">epoll_wait()</span> system calls.) Why might this behavior be useful?</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Modify the program in Example 63-3 (<tt>demo_sigio.c</tt>) to use a realtime signal instead of <tt>SIGIO</tt>. Modify the signal handler to accept a <span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span> argument and display the values of the <span class="docEmphasis">si_fd</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">si_code</span> fields of this structure.</p></div></li></ol></div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
