<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>64.2. UNIX 98 Pseudoterminals</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">64.2. UNIX 98 Pseudoterminals</h3><p class="docText">Bit by bit, we’ll work toward the development of a function, <span class="docEmphasis">ptyFork()</span>, that does most of the work to create the setup shown in Figure 64-2. We’ll then use this function to implement the <span class="docEmphasis">script(1)</span> program. Before doing this though, we look at the various library functions used with UNIX 98 pseudoterminals:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">posix_openpt()</span>
 function opens an unused pseudoterminal master device, returning a file
 descriptor that is used to refer to the device in later calls.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">grantpt()</span> function changes the ownership and permissions of the slave device corresponding to a pseudoterminal master device.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">unlockpt()</span> function unlocks the slave device corresponding to a pseudoterminal master device, so that the slave device can be opened.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">ptsname()</span>
 function returns the name of the slave device corresponding to a 
pseudoterminal master device. The slave device can then be opened using <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>.</p></li></ul><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EG3IM">64.2.1. Opening an Unused Master: <span class="docEmphasis">posix_openpt()</span></h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">posix_openpt()</span>
 function finds and opens an unused pseudoterminal master device, and 
returns a file descriptor that can later be used to refer to this 
device.</p><pre>#define _XOPEN_SOURCE 600
#include &lt;stdlib.h&gt;
#include &lt;fcntl.h&gt;

int <b>posix_openpt</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns file descriptor on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> argument is constructed by ORing zero or more of the following constants together:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">O_RDWR</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Open the device for both reading and writing. Normally, we would always include this constant in <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">O_NOCTTY</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">Don’t
 make this terminal the controlling terminal for the process. On Linux, a
 pseudoterminal master can’t become a controlling terminal for a 
process, regardless of whether the <tt>O_NOCTTY</tt> flag is specified when calling <span class="docEmphasis">posix_openpt()</span>.
 (This makes sense because the pseudoterminal master isn’t really a 
terminal; it is the other side of a terminal to which the slave is 
connected.) However, on some implementations, <tt>O_NOCTTY</tt>
 is required if we want to prevent a process from acquiring a 
controlling terminal as a consequence of opening a pseudoterminal master
 device.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">Like <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">posix_openpt()</span> uses the lowest available file descriptor to open the pseudoterminal master.</p><p class="docText">Calling <span class="docEmphasis">posix_openpt()</span> also results in the creation of a corresponding pseudoterminal slave device file in the <tt>/dev/pts</tt> directory. We say more about this file when we describe the <span class="docEmphasis">ptsname()</span> function below.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">posix_openpt()</span>
 function is new in SUSv3, and was an invention of the POSIX committee. 
In the original System V pseudoterminal implementation, obtaining an 
available pseudoterminal master was accomplished by opening the <span class="docEmphasis">pseudoterminal master clone device</span>, <tt>/dev/ptmx</tt>.
 Opening this virtual device automatically locates and opens the next 
unused pseudoterminal master, and returns a file descriptor for it. This
 device is provided on Linux, where <span class="docEmphasis">posix_openpt()</span> is implemented as follows:</p><pre>int
posix_openpt(int flags)
{
    return open("/dev/ptmx", flags);
}</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ECAJM">64.2.1.1. Limits on the number of UNIX 98 pseudoterminals</h5><p class="docText">Because
 each pseudoterminal pair in use consumes a small amount of nonswappable
 kernel memory, the kernel imposes a limit on the number of UNIX 98 
pseudoterminal pairs on the system. In kernels up to 2.6.3, this limit 
is controlled by a kernel configuration option (<tt>CONFIG_UNIX98_PTYS</tt>). The default value for this option is 256, but we can change the limit to any value in the range 0 to 2048.</p><p class="docText">From Linux 2.6.4 onward, the <tt>CONFIG_UNIX98_PTYS</tt>
 kernel configuration option is discarded in favor of a more flexible 
approach. Instead, the limit on the number of pseudoterminals is defined
 by the value in the Linux-specific <tt>/proc/sys/kernel/pty/max</tt> file. The default value for this file is 4096, and it can be set to any value up to 1,048,576. A related read-only file, <tt>/proc/sys/kernel/pty/nr</tt>, shows how many UNIX 98 pseudoterminals are currently in use.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EFCJM">64.2.2. Changing Slave Ownership and Permissions: <span class="docEmphasis">grantpt()</span></h4><p class="docText">SUSv3 specifies the use of <span class="docEmphasis">grantpt()</span>
 to change the ownership and permissions of the slave device that 
corresponds to the pseudoterminal master referred to by the file 
descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">mfd</span>. On Linux, calling <span class="docEmphasis">grantpt()</span> is not actually necessary. However, the use of <span class="docEmphasis">grantpt()</span> is required on some implementations, and portable applications should call it after calling <span class="docEmphasis">posix_openpt()</span>.</p><pre>#define _XOPEN_SOURCE 500
#include &lt;stdlib.h&gt;

int <b>grantpt</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">mfd</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">On systems where <span class="docEmphasis">grantpt()</span> is required, this function creates a child process that executes a set-user-ID-<span class="docEmphasis">root</span> program. This program, usually called <span class="docEmphasis">pt_chown</span>, performs the following operations on the pseudoterminal slave device:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">change the ownership of the slave to be the same as the effective user ID of the calling process;</p></li><li><p class="docList">change the group of the slave to <span class="docEmphasis">tty</span>; and</p></li><li><p class="docList">change the permissions on the slave so that the owner has read and write permissions, and group has write permission.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The reason for changing the group of the terminal to <span class="docEmphasis">tty</span> and enabling group write permission is that the <span class="docEmphasis">wall(1)</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">write(1)</span> programs are set-group-ID programs owned by the <span class="docEmphasis">tty</span> group.</p><p class="docText">On Linux, a pseudoterminal slave is automatically configured in the above manner, which is why calling <span class="docEmphasis">grantpt()</span> isn’t needed (but still should be done).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Because it may create a child process, SUSv3 says that the behavior of <span class="docEmphasis">grantpt()</span> is unspecified if the calling program has installed a handler for <tt>SIGCHLD</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EOEJM">64.2.3. Unlocking the Slave: <span class="docEmphasis">unlockpt()</span></h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">unlockpt()</span> function removes an internal lock on the slave corresponding to the pseudoterminal master referred to by the file descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">mfd</span>.
 The purpose of this locking mechanism is to allow the calling process 
to perform whatever initialization is required for the pseudoterminal 
slave (e.g., calling <span class="docEmphasis">grantpt()</span>) before another process is allowed to open it.</p><pre>#define _XOPEN_SOURCE
#include &lt;stdlib.h&gt;

int <b>unlockpt</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">mfd</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns 0 on success, or -1 on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">An attempt to open a pseudoterminal slave before it has been unlocked with <span class="docEmphasis">unlockpt()</span> fails with the error <tt>EIO</tt>.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4GJM">64.2.4. Obtaining the Name of the Slave: <span class="docEmphasis">ptsname()</span></h4><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">ptsname()</span>
 function returns the name of the pseudoterminal slave corresponding to 
the pseudoterminal master referred to by the file descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">mfd</span>.</p><pre>#define _XOPEN_SOURCE
#include &lt;stdlib.h&gt;

char *<b>ptsname</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">mfd</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns pointer to (possibly statically allocated) string on success, or NULL on error</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">On Linux (as on most implementations), <span class="docEmphasis">ptsname()</span> returns a name of the form /<tt>dev/pts/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">nn</span>, where <span class="docEmphasis">nn</span> is replaced by a number that uniquely identifies this pseudoterminal slave.</p><p class="docText">The buffer used to return the slave name is normally statically allocated. It is thus overwritten by subsequent calls to <span class="docEmphasis">ptsname()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The GNU C library provides a reentrant analog of <span class="docEmphasis">ptsname()</span> in the form of <span class="docEmphasis">ptsname_r(mfd, strbuf, buflen)</span>. However, this function is nonstandard and is available on few other UNIX implementations. The <tt>_GNU_SOURCE</tt> feature test macro must be defined in order to obtain the declaration of <span class="docEmphasis">ptsname_r()</span> from <tt>&lt;stdlib.h&gt;</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Once we have unlocked the slave device with <span class="docEmphasis">unlockpt()</span>, we can open it using the traditional <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> system call.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On
 System V derivatives that employ STREAMS, it may be necessary to 
perform some further steps (pushing STREAMS modules onto the slave 
device after opening it). An example of how to perform these steps can 
be found in [Stevens &amp; Rago, 2005].</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
