<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>64.5. Pseudoterminal I/O</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">64.5. Pseudoterminal I/O</h3><p class="docText">A
 pseudoterminal pair is similar to a bidirectional pipe. Anything that 
is written on the master appears as input on the slave, and anything 
that is written on the slave appears as input on the master.</p><p class="docText">The
 point that distinguishes a pseudoterminal pair from a bidirectional 
pipe is that the slave side operates like a terminal device. The slave 
interprets input in the same way as a normal controlling terminal would 
interpret keyboard input. For example, if we write a <span class="docEmphasis">Control-C</span> character (the usual terminal <span class="docEmphasis">interrupt</span> character) to the pseudoterminal master, the slave will generate a <tt>SIGINT</tt>
 signal for its foreground process group. Just as with a conventional 
terminal, when a pseudoterminal slave operates in canonical mode (the 
default), input is buffered line by line. In other words, the program 
reading from the pseudoterminal slave will see (a line of) input only 
when we write a newline character to the pseudoterminal master.</p><p class="docText">Like
 pipes, pseudoterminals have a limited capacity. If we exhaust this 
capacity, then further writes are blocked until the process on the other
 side of the pseudoterminal has consumed some bytes.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On Linux, the pseudoterminal capacity is about 4 kB in each direction.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">If we close all file descriptors referring to the pseudoterminal master, then:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">If the slave device has a controlling process, a <tt>SIGHUP</tt> signal is sent to that process (see Section 34.6).</p></li><li><p class="docList">A <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> from the slave device returns end-of-file (0).</p></li><li><p class="docList">A <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> to the slave device fails with the error <tt>EIO</tt>. (On some other UNIX implementations, <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> fails with the error <tt>ENXIO</tt> in this case.)</p></li></ul><p class="docText">If we close all file descriptors referring to the pseudoterminal slave, then:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">A <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> from the master device fails with the error <tt>EIO</tt>. (On some other UNIX implementations, a <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> returns end-of-file in this case.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">A <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> to the master device succeeds, unless the input queue of the slave device is full, in which case the <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> blocks. If the slave device is subsequently reopened, these bytes can be read.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">UNIX implementations vary widely in their behavior for the last case. On some UNIX implementations, <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> fails with the error <tt>EIO</tt>. On other implementations, <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>
 succeeds, but the output bytes are discarded (i.e., they can’t be read 
if the slave is reopened). In general, these variations don’t present a 
problem. Normally, the process on the master side detects that the slave
 has been closed because a <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> from the master returns end-of-file or fails. At this point, the process performs no further writes to the master.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESBJM">64.5.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EWBJM">64.5.1.1. Packet mode</h5><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Packet mode</span>
 is a mechanism that allows the process running above a pseudoterminal 
master to be informed when the following events related to software flow
 control occur on the pseudoterminal slave:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">the input or output queue is flushed;</p></li><li><p class="docList">terminal output is stopped or started (<span class="docEmphasis">Control-S/Control-Q</span>); or</p></li><li><p class="docList">flow control was enabled or disabled.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Packet
 mode helps with handling software flow control in certain 
pseudoterminal applications that provide network login services (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">telnet</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">rlogin</span>).</p><p class="docText">Packet mode is enabled by applying the <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> <tt>TIOCPKT</tt> operation to the file descriptor referring to the pseudoterminal master:</p><pre>int arg;

arg = 1;                /* 1 == enable; 0 == disable */
if (ioctl(mfd, TIOCPKT, &amp;arg) == -1)
    errExit("ioctl");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">When packet mode is 
in operation, reads from the pseudoterminal master return either a 
single nonzero control byte, which is a bit mask indicating the state 
change(s) that occurred on the slave device, or a 0 byte followed by one
 or more bytes of data that were written on the pseudoterminal slave.</p><p class="docText">When a state change occurs on a pseudoterminal that is operating in packet mode, <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> indicates that an exceptional condition (the <span class="docEmphasis">exceptfds</span> argument) has occurred on the master, and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> returns <tt>POLLPRI</tt> in the <span class="docEmphasis">revents</span> field. (Refer to Chapter 63 for descriptions of <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span>.)</p><p class="docText">Packet
 mode is not standardized in SUSv3, and some details vary on other UNIX 
implementations. Further details of packet mode on Linux, including the 
bit-mask values used to indicate state changes, can be found in the <span class="docEmphasis">tty_ioctl(4)</span> manual page.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
