<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>64.7. Terminal Attributes and Window Size</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">64.7. Terminal Attributes and Window Size</h3><p class="docText">The master and slave device share terminal attributes (<span class="docEmphasis">termios</span>) and window size (<span class="docEmphasis">winsize</span>) structures. (Both of these structures are described in Chapter 62.)
 This means that the program running above the pseudoterminal master can
 change these attributes for the pseudoterminal slave by applying <span class="docEmphasis">tcsetattr()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> to the file descriptor of the master device.</p><p class="docText">One example of where changing terminal attributes can be useful is in the script program. Suppose we are running <span class="docEmphasis">script</span>
 in a terminal emulator window, and we change the size of the window. In
 this case, the terminal emulator program will inform the kernel of the 
change in the size of the corresponding terminal device, but this change
 is not reflected in the separate kernel record for the pseudoterminal 
slave (see Figure 64-4). As a consequence, screen-oriented programs (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">vi</span>)
 running above the pseudoterminal slave will produce confusing output, 
since their understanding of the terminal window size differs from the 
actual size of the terminal. We can solve this problem as follows:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Install a handler for <tt>SIGWINCH</tt> in the <span class="docEmphasis">script</span> parent process, so that it is signaled when the size of the terminal window changes.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">When the <span class="docEmphasis">script</span> parent receives a <tt>SIGWINCH</tt> signal, it uses an <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> <tt>TIOCGWINSZ</tt> operation to retrieve a <span class="docEmphasis">winsize</span> structure for the terminal window associated with its standard input. It then uses this structure in an <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> <tt>TIOCSWINSZ</tt> operation that sets the window size of the pseudoterminal master.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If the new pseudoterminal window size is different from the old size, then the kernel generates a <tt>SIGWINCH</tt> signal for the foreground process group of the pseudoterminal slave. Screen-handling programs such as <span class="docEmphasis">vi</span> are designed to catch this signal and perform an <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> <tt>TIOCGWINSZ</tt> operation to update their understanding of the terminal window size.</p></div></li></ol></div><p class="docText">We described the details of terminal window sizes and the <span class="docEmphasis">ioctl()</span> <tt>TIOCGWINSZ</tt> and <tt>TIOCSWINSZ</tt> operations in Section 62.9.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
