<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>64.8. BSD Pseudoterminals</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">64.8. BSD Pseudoterminals</h3><p class="docText">For
 most of this chapter, we have focused on UNIX 98 pseudoterminals, since
 this is the style of pseudoterminal that is standardized in SUSv3 and 
thus should be used in all new programs. However, we may sometimes 
encounter BSD pseudoterminals in older applications or when porting 
programs to Linux from other UNIX implementations. Therefore, we now 
consider the details of BSD pseudoterminals.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The
 use of BSD pseudoterminals is deprecated on Linux. From Linux 2.6.4 
onward, BSD pseudoterminal support is an optional kernel component that 
can be configured via the <tt>CONFIG_LEGACY_PTYS</tt> option.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">BSD
 pseudoterminals differ from their UNIX 98 counterparts only in the 
details of how pseudoterminal master and slave devices are found and 
opened. Once the master and slave have been opened, BSD pseudoterminals 
operate in the same way as UNIX 98 pseudoterminals.</p><p class="docText">With UNIX 98 pseudoterminals, we obtain an unused pseudoterminal master by calling <span class="docEmphasis">posix_openpt()</span>, which opens <tt>/dev/ptmx</tt>, the pseudoterminal master clone device. We then obtain the name of the corresponding pseudoterminal slave using <span class="docEmphasis">ptsname()</span>. By contrast, with BSD pseudoterminals, the master and slave device pairs are precreated entries in the <tt>/dev</tt> directory. Each master device has a name of the form <tt>/dev/pty</tt><span class="docEmphasis">xy</span>, where <span class="docEmphasis">x</span> is replaced by a letter in the 16-letter range <tt>[p-za-e]</tt> and <span class="docEmphasis">y</span> is replaced by a letter in the 16-letter range <tt>[0-9a-f]</tt>. The slave corresponding to a particular pseudoterminal master has a name of the form <tt>/dev/tty</tt><span class="docEmphasis">xy</span>. Thus, for example, the devices <tt>/dev/ptyp0</tt> and <tt>/dev/ttyp0</tt> constitute a BSD pseudoterminal pair.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">UNIX
 implementations vary in the number and names of BSD pseudoterminal 
pairs that they supply, with some supplying as few as 32 pairs by 
default. Most implementations provide at least the 32 master devices 
with names in the range <tt>/dev/pty[pq][0-9a-f]</tt>, along with the corresponding slave devices.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">To
 find an unused pseudoterminal pair, we execute a loop that attempts to 
open each master device in turn, until one of them is opened 
successfully. While executing this loop, there are two errors that we 
may encounter when calling <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">If a given master device name doesn’t exist, <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> fails with the error <tt>ENOENT</tt>.
 Typically, this means we’ve run through the complete set of 
pseudoterminal master names on the system without finding a free device 
(i.e., there was not the full range of devices listed above).</p></li><li><p class="docList">If the master device is in use, <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> fails with the error <tt>EIO</tt>. We can just ignore this error and try the next device.</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">On HP-UX 11, <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> fails with the error <tt>EBUSY</tt> on an attempt to open a BSD pseudoterminal master that is in use.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Once we have found an available master device, we can obtain the name of the corresponding slave by substituting <tt>tty</tt> for <tt>pty</tt> in the name of the master. We can then open the slave using <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">With BSD pseudoterminals, there is no equivalent of <span class="docEmphasis">grantpt()</span>
 to change the ownership and permissions of the pseudoterminal slave. If
 we need to do this, then we must make explicit calls to <span class="docEmphasis">chown()</span> (only possible in a privileged program) and <span class="docEmphasis">chmod()</span>, or write a set-user-ID program (like <span class="docEmphasis">pt_chown</span>) that performs this task for an unprivileged program.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Example 64-4 shows a reimplementation of the <span class="docEmphasis">ptyMasterOpen()</span> function of Section 64.3 using BSD pseudoterminals. Substituting this implementation is all that is required to make our <span class="docEmphasis">script</span> program (Section 64.6) work with BSD pseudoterminals.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E1IJM">Example 64-4. Implementation of <span class="docEmphasis">ptyMasterOpen()</span> using BSD pseudoterminals</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>pty/pty_master_open_bsd.c</b>
#include &lt;fcntl.h&gt;
#include "pty_master_open.h"            /* Declares ptyMasterOpen() */
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

#define PTYM_PREFIX     "/dev/pty"
#define PTYS_PREFIX     "/dev/tty"
#define PTY_PREFIX_LEN  (sizeof(PTYM_PREFIX) - 1)
#define PTY_NAME_LEN    (PTY_PREFIX_LEN + sizeof("XY"))
#define X_RANGE         "pqrstuvwxyzabcde"
#define Y_RANGE         "0123456789abcdef"

int
ptyMasterOpen(char *slaveName, size_t snLen)
{
    int masterFd, n;
    char *x, *y;
    char masterName[PTY_NAME_LEN];

    if (PTY_NAME_LEN &gt; snLen) {
        errno = EOVERFLOW;
        return -1;
    }

    memset(masterName, 0, PTY_NAME_LEN);
    strncpy(masterName, PTYM_PREFIX, PTY_PREFIX_LEN);

    for (x = X_RANGE; *x != '\0'; x++) {
        masterName[PTY_PREFIX_LEN] = *x;

        for (y = Y_RANGE; *y != '\0'; y++) {
            masterName[PTY_PREFIX_LEN + 1] = *y;

            masterFd = open(masterName, O_RDWR);

            if (masterFd == -1) {
                if (errno == ENOENT)    /* No such file */
                    return -1;          /* Probably no more pty devices */
                else                    /* Other error (e.g., pty busy) */
                    continue;

            } else {            /* Return slave name corresponding to master */
                n = snprintf(slaveName, snLen, "%s%c%c", PTYS_PREFIX, *x, *y);
                if (n &gt;= snLen) {
                    errno = EOVERFLOW;
                    return -1;
                } else if (n == -1) {
                    return -1;
                }

                return masterFd;
            }
        }
    }

    return -1;                  /* Tried all ptys without success */
}
     <b>pty/pty_master_open_bsd.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
