<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>64.9. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">64.9. Summary</h3><p class="docText">A
 pseudoterminal pair consists of a connected master device and slave 
device. Together, these two devices provide a bidirectional IPC channel.
 The benefit of a pseudoterminal is that, on the slave side of the pair,
 we can connect a terminal-oriented program that is driven by the 
program that has opened the master device. The pseudoterminal slave 
behaves just like a conventional terminal. All of the operations that 
can be applied to a conventional terminal can be applied to the slave, 
and input transmitted from the master to the slave is interpreted in the
 same manner as keyboard input is interpreted on a conventional 
terminal.</p><p class="docText">One 
common use of pseudoterminals is in applications that provide network 
login services. However, pseudoterminals are also used in many other 
programs, such as terminal emulators and the <span class="docEmphasis">script(1)</span> program.</p><p class="docText">Different
 pseudoterminals APIs arose on System V and BSD. Linux supports both 
APIs, but the System V API forms the basis for the pseudoterminal API 
that is standardized in SUSv3.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
