<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>64.10. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">64.10. Exercises</h3><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">In what order do the <span class="docEmphasis">script</span> parent process and the child shell process terminate when the user types the end-of-file character (usually <span class="docEmphasis">Control-D</span>) while running the program in Example 64-3? Why?</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Make the following modifications to the program in Example 64-3 (<tt>script.c</tt>):</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The standard <span class="docEmphasis">script(1)</span>
 program adds lines to the beginning and the end of the output file 
showing the time the script started and finished. Add this feature.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Add code to handle changes to the terminal window size as described in Section 64.7. You may find the program in Example 62-5 (<tt>demo_SIGWINCH.c</tt>) useful for testing this feature.</p></div></li></ol></div></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Modify the program in Example 64-3 (<tt>script.c</tt>) to replace the use of <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>
 by a pair of processes: one to handle data transfer from the terminal 
to the pseudoterminal master, and the other to handle data transfer in 
the opposite direction.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Modify the program in Example 64-3 (<tt>script.c</tt>) to add a time-stamped recording feature. Each time the program writes a string to the <tt>typescript</tt> file, it should also write a time-stamped string to a second file (say, <tt>typescript.timed</tt>). Records written to this second file might have the following general form:</p><pre>&lt;timestamp&gt; &lt;space&gt; &lt;string&gt; &lt;newline&gt;</pre><br/>
<p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">timestamp</span>
 should be recorded in text form as the number of milliseconds since the
 start of the script session. Recording the timestamp in text form has 
the advantage that the resulting file is human-readable. Within <span class="docEmphasis">string</span>, real newline characters will need to be escaped. One possibility is to record a newline as the 2-character sequence <tt>\n</tt> and a backslash as <tt>\\</tt>.</p><p class="docList">Write a second program, <tt>script_replay.c</tt>,
 that reads the time-stamped script file and displays its contents on 
standard output at the same rate at which they were originally written. 
Together, these two programs provide a simple recording and playback 
feature for shell session logs.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Implement client and server programs to provide a simple <span class="docEmphasis">telnet</span>-style remote login facility. Design the server to handle clients concurrently (Section 60.1). Figure 64-3
 shows the setup that needs to be established for each client login. 
What isn’t shown in that diagram is the parent server process, which 
handles incoming socket connections from clients and creates a server 
child to handle each connection. Note that all of the work of 
authenticating the user and starting a login shell can be dealt with in 
each server child by having the (grand)child created by <span class="docEmphasis">ptyFork()</span> go on to exec <span class="docEmphasis">login(1)</span>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Add
 code to the program developed in the previous exercise to update the 
login accounting files at the start and end of the login session (Chapter 40).</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Suppose we execute a long-running program that slowly generates output that is redirected to a file or pipe, as in this example:</p><pre>$ <b>longrunner | grep str</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docList">One problem with the above scenario is that, by default, the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> package flushes standard output only when the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffer is filled. This means that the output from the <span class="docEmphasis">longrunner</span>
 program will appear in bursts separated by long intervals of time. One 
way to circumvent this problem is to write a program that does the 
following:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Create a pseudoterminal.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Exec the program named in its command-line arguments with the standard file descriptors connected to the pseudoterminal slave.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Read output from the pseudoterminal master and write it immediately to standard output (<tt>STDOUT_FILENO</tt>,
 file descriptor 1), and, at the same time, read input from the terminal
 and write it to the pseudoterminal master, so that it can be read by 
the execed program.</p><p class="docList">Such a program, which we’ll call <span class="docEmphasis">unbuffer</span>, would be used as follows:</p><pre>$ <b>./unbuffer longrunner | grep str</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docList">Write the <span class="docEmphasis">unbuffer</span> program. (Much of the code for this program will be similar to that of Example 64-3.)</p></div></li></ol></div></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write a program that implements a scripting language that can be used to drive <span class="docEmphasis">vi</span> in a noninteractive mode. Since <span class="docEmphasis">vi</span> expects to be run from a terminal, the program will need to employ a pseudoterminal.</p></div></li></ol></div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
