<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Appendix A. Tracing System Calls</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h2 class="docAppendixTitle" id="title-ID0EPFJM">Appendix A. Tracing System Calls</h2><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">strace</span>
 command allows us to trace the system calls made by a program. This is 
useful for debugging, or simply to find out what a program is doing. In 
its simplest form, we use <span class="docEmphasis">strace</span> as follows:</p><pre>$ <b>strace</b> <b><tt><i>command arg...</i></tt></b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This runs <span class="docEmphasis">command</span>, with the given command-line arguments, producing a trace of the system calls it makes. By default, <span class="docEmphasis">strace</span> writes its output to <span class="docEmphasis">stderr</span>, but we can change this using the <span class="docEmphasis">-o filename</span> option.</p><p class="docText">Examples of the type of output produced by <span class="docEmphasis">strace</span> include the following (taken from the output of the command <span class="docEmphasis">strace date</span>):</p><pre class="preFixedWidth">execve("/bin/date", ["date"], [/* 114 vars */]) = 0
access("/etc/ld.so.preload", R_OK)      = -1 ENOENT (No such file or directory)
open("/etc/ld.so.cache", O_RDONLY)      = 3
fstat64(3, {st_mode=S_IFREG|0644, st_size=111059, ...}) = 0
mmap2(NULL, 111059, PROT_READ, MAP_PRIVATE, 3, 0) = 0xb7f38000
close(3)                                = 0
open("/lib/libc.so.6", O_RDONLY)        = 3
fstat64(3, {st_mode=S_IFREG|0755, st_size=1491141, ...}) = 0
close(3)                                = 0
write(1, "Mon Jan 17 12:14:24 CET 2011\n", 29) = 29
exit_group(0)                           = ?

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Each system call is displayed 
in the form of a function call, with both input and output arguments 
shown in parentheses. As can be seen from the above examples, arguments 
are printed in symbolic form:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Bit masks are represented using the corresponding symbolic constants.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Strings are printed in text form (up to a limit of 32 characters, but the <span class="docEmphasis">-s strsize</span> option can be used to change this limit).</p></li><li><p class="docList">Structure fields are individually displayed (by default, only an abbreviated subset of large structures is displayed, but the <span class="docEmphasis">-v</span> option can be used to display the whole structure).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">After the closing parenthesis of the traced call, <span class="docEmphasis">strace</span> prints an equal sign (<tt>=</tt>), followed by the return value of the system call. If the system call failed, the symbolic <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> value is also displayed. Thus, we see <tt>ENOENT</tt> displayed for the failure of the <span class="docEmphasis">access()</span> call above.</p><p class="docText">Even for a simple program, the output produced by <span class="docEmphasis">strace</span>
 is made voluminous by the system calls executed by the C run-time 
startup code and the loading of shared libraries. For a complex program,
 the <span class="docEmphasis">strace</span> output can be extremely long. For these reasons, it is sometimes useful to selectively filter the output of <span class="docEmphasis">strace</span>. One way to do this is to use <span class="docEmphasis">grep</span>, like so:</p><pre>$ <b>strace date 2&gt;&amp;1 | grep open</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Another method is to use the
 -e option to select the events to be traced. For example, we can use 
the following command to trace <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">close()</span> system calls:</p><pre>$ <b>strace -e trace=open,close date</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">When using either of the above 
techniques, we need to be aware that, in a few cases, the true name of a
 system call differs from the name of its <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> wrapper. For example, though we refer to all of the <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span>-type functions as system calls in Chapter 26, most of them (<span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">waitpid()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">wait3()</span>) are wrappers that invoke the kernel’s <span class="docEmphasis">wait4()</span> system call service routine. This latter name is displayed by <span class="docEmphasis">strace</span>, and we must specify that name in the <span class="docEmphasis">-e trace=</span> option. Similarly, all of the <span class="docEmphasis">exec</span> library functions (Section 27.2) invoke the <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span> system call. Often, we can make a good guess about such transformations by looking at the <span class="docEmphasis">strace</span> output (or looking at the output produced by <span class="docEmphasis">strace -c</span>, described below), but, failing that, we may need to check the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> source code to see what transformations may be occurring inside wrapper functions.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">strace(1)</span> manual page documents a host of further options to <span class="docEmphasis">strace</span>, including the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">-p pid</span>
 option is used to trace an existing process, by specifying its process 
ID. Unprivileged users are restricted to tracing only processes that 
they own and that are not executing set-user-ID or set-group-ID programs
 (Section 9.3).</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">-c</span> option causes <span class="docEmphasis">strace</span>
 to print a summary of all system calls made by the program. For each 
system call, the summary information includes the total number of calls,
 the number of calls that failed, and the total time spent executing the
 calls.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">-f</span> option causes children of this process also to be traced. If we are sending trace output to a file (<span class="docEmphasis">-o filename</span>), then the alternative <span class="docEmphasis">-ff</span> option causes each process to write its trace output to a file named <span class="docEmphasis">filename.PID</span>.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">strace</span> command is Linux-specific, but most UNIX implementations provide their own equivalents (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">truss</span> on Solaris and <span class="docEmphasis">ktrace</span> on the BSDs).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">ltrace</span> command performs an analogous task to <span class="docEmphasis">strace</span>, but for library functions. See the <span class="docEmphasis">ltrace(1)</span> manual page for details.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
