<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Appendix B. Parsing Command-Line Options</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h2 class="docAppendixTitle" id="title-ID0ELHJM">Appendix B. Parsing Command-Line Options</h2><p class="docText">A typical UNIX command line has the following form:</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><pre><span class="docEmphasis">command</span> [ <span class="docEmphasis">options</span> ] <span class="docEmphasis">arguments</span></pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">An option takes the form of a hyphen (<tt>-</tt>)
 followed by a unique character identifying the option and a possible 
argument for the option. An option that takes an argument may optionally
 be separated from that argument by white space. Multiple options can be
 grouped after a single hyphen, and the last option in the group may be 
one that takes an argument. According to these rules, the following 
commands are all equivalent:</p><pre>$ <b>grep -l -i -f patterns *.c</b>
$ <b>grep -lif patterns *.c</b>
$ <b>grep -lifpatterns *.c</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In the above commands, the <span class="docEmphasis">-l</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">-i</span> options don’t have an argument, while the <span class="docEmphasis">-f</span> option takes the string <span class="docEmphasis">patterns</span> as its argument.</p><p class="docText">Since
 many programs (including some of the example programs in this book) 
need to parse options in the above format, the facility to do so is 
encapsulated in a standard library function, <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;

extern int <b>optind</b>, <b>opterr</b>, <b>optopt</b>;
extern char *<b>optarg</b>;

int <b>getopt</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">argc</span>, char *const <span class="docEmphasis">argv</span>[], const char *<span class="docEmphasis">optstring</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">See main text for description of return value</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span> function parses the set of command-line arguments given in <span class="docEmphasis">argc</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">argv</span>, which would normally be taken from the arguments of the same name to <span class="docEmphasis">main()</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">optstring</span> argument specifies the set of options that <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span> should look for in <span class="docEmphasis">argv</span>. This argument consists of a sequence of characters, each of which identifies an option. SUSv3 specifies that <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span> should permit at least the characters in the 62-character set <tt>[a-zA-Z0-9]</tt> as options. Most implementations allow other characters as well, with the exception of <tt>:</tt>, <tt>?</tt>, and <tt>-</tt>, which have special meaning to <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span>. Each option character may be followed by a colon (<tt>:</tt>), indicating that this option expects an argument.</p><p class="docText">We parse a command line by calling <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span>
 repeatedly. Each call returns information about the next unprocessed 
option. If an option was found, the option character is returned as the 
function result. If the end of the option list was reached, <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span> returns -1. If an option has an argument, <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span> sets the global variable <span class="docEmphasis">optarg</span> to point to that argument.</p><p class="docText">Note that the function result of <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span> is <span class="docEmphasis">int</span>. We must not assign the result of <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span> to a variable of type <span class="docEmphasis">char</span>, because the comparison of the <span class="docEmphasis">char</span> variable with -1 won’t work on systems where <span class="docEmphasis">char</span> is unsigned.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">If an option doesn’t have an argument, then the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc getopt()</span> implementation (like most other implementations) sets <span class="docEmphasis">optarg</span> to <tt>NULL</tt>. However, SUSv3 doesn’t specify this behavior, so applications can’t portably rely on it (nor is it usually needed).</p><p class="docText">SUSv3 specifies (and <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> implements) a related function, <span class="docEmphasis">getsubopt()</span>, that parses option arguments that consist of one or more comma-separated strings of the form <span class="docEmphasis">name[=value]</span>. See the <span class="docEmphasis">getsubopt(3)</span> manual page for details.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">On each call to <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span>, the global variable <span class="docEmphasis">optind</span> is updated to contain the index of the next unprocessed element of <span class="docEmphasis">argv</span>. (When multiple options are grouped in a single word, <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span> does some internal bookkeeping to keep track of which part of the word is next to be processed.) The <span class="docEmphasis">optind</span> variable is automatically set to 1 before the first call to <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span>. There are two circumstances where we may make use of this variable:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">If <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span> returns -1, indicating that no more options are present and <span class="docEmphasis">optind</span> is less than <span class="docEmphasis">argc</span>, then <span class="docEmphasis">argv[optind]</span> is the location of the next nonoption word from the command line.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If we are processing multiple command-line vectors or rescanning the same command line, then we must explicitly reset <span class="docEmphasis">optind</span> to 1.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span> function returns -1, indicating the end of the option list, in the following circumstances:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The end of the list described by <span class="docEmphasis">argc</span> plus <span class="docEmphasis">argv</span> was reached (i.e., <span class="docEmphasis">argv[optind]</span> is <tt>NULL</tt>).</p></li><li><p class="docList">The next unprocessed word in <span class="docEmphasis">argv</span> does not start with an option delimiter (i.e., <span class="docEmphasis">argv[optind][0]</span> is not a hyphen).</p></li><li><p class="docList">The next unprocessed word in <span class="docEmphasis">argv</span>
 consists of a single hyphen (i.e., argv[optind] is -). Some commands 
understand such a word as an argument with a special meaning, as 
described in Section 5.11.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The next unprocessed word in <span class="docEmphasis">argv</span> consists of two hyphens (<tt>--</tt>). In this case, <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span> silently consumes the two hyphens and <span class="docEmphasis">optind</span>
 is adjusted to point to the next word after the double hyphen. This 
syntax enables a user to indicate the end of the options of a command, 
even when the next word on the command line (after the double hyphen) 
looks like an option (i.e., starts with a hyphen). For example, if we 
want to use <span class="docEmphasis">grep</span> to search for the string <span class="docEmphasis">-k</span> inside a file, then we would write <span class="docEmphasis">grep -- -k myfile</span>.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Two kinds of errors may occur as <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span> processes an option list. One error arises when an option that is not specified in <span class="docEmphasis">optstring</span>
 is encountered. The other error occurs when an argument is not supplied
 to an option that expects one (i.e., the option appears at the end of 
the command line). The rules about how <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span> handles and reports these errors are as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">By default, <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span> prints an appropriate error message on standard error and returns the character <tt>?</tt> as its function result. In this case, the global variable <span class="docEmphasis">optopt</span> returns the erroneous option character (i.e., the one that is unrecognized or whose argument is missing).</p></li><li><p class="docList">The global variable <span class="docEmphasis">opterr</span> can be used to suppress the error messages printed by <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span>. By default, this variable is set to 1. If we set it to 0, then <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span>
 doesn’t print error messages, but otherwise behaves as described in the
 preceding point. The program can detect the error via the <tt>?</tt> function result and display a customized error message.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Alternatively, we may suppress error messages by specifying a colon (<tt>:</tt>) as the first character in <span class="docEmphasis">optstring</span> (doing so overrides the effect of setting <span class="docEmphasis">opterr</span> to 0). In this case, an error is reported as with setting <span class="docEmphasis">opterr</span>
 to 0, except that an option with a missing argument is reported by 
returning : as the function result. This difference in return values 
allows us to distinguish the two types of errors (unrecognized option 
and missing option argument), if we need to do so.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The above error-reporting alternatives are summarized in Table B-1.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table B-1. <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span> error-reporting behavior</h5></caption><colgroup span="4"><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Error-reporting method</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom"><span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span> displays error message?</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Return for unrecognized option</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Return for missing argument</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">default (<span class="docEmphasis">opterr == 1</span>)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Y</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>?</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>?</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">opterr == 0</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">N</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>?</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>?</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>:</tt> at start of <span class="docEmphasis">optstring</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">N</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>?</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>:</tt></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
