<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>B.1. </title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">B.1. </h3><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EZKJM">B.1.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E4KJM">B.1.1.1. Example program</h5><p class="docText">Example B-1 demonstrates the use of <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span> to parse the command line for two options: the <span class="docEmphasis">-x</span> option, which doesn’t expect an argument, and the <span class="docEmphasis">-p</span> option which does expect an argument. This program suppresses error messages from <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span> by specifying a colon (<tt>:</tt>) as the first character in <span class="docEmphasis">optstring</span>.</p><p class="docText">To allow us to observe the operation of <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span>, we include some <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> calls to display the information returned by each <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span>
 call. On completion, the program prints some summary information about 
the specified options and also displays the next nonoption word on the 
command line, if there is one. The following shell session log shows the
 results when we run this program with different command-line arguments:</p><pre>$ <b>./t_getopt -x -p hello world</b>
opt =120 (x); optind = 2
opt =112 (p); optind = 4
-x was specified (count=1)
-p was specified with the value "hello"
First nonoption argument is "world" at argv[4]
$ <b>./t_getopt -p</b>
opt = 58 (:); optind = 2; optopt =112 (p)
Missing argument (-p)
Usage: ./t_getopt [-p arg] [-x]
$ <b>./t_getopt -a</b>
opt = 63 (?); optind = 2; optopt = 97 (a)
Unrecognized option (-a)
Usage: ./t_getopt [-p arg] [-x]
$ <b>./t_getopt -p str -- -x</b>
opt =112 (p); optind = 3
-p was specified with the value "str"
First nonoption argument is "-x" at argv[4]
$ <b>./t_getopt -p -x</b>
opt =112 (p); optind = 3
-p was specified with the value "-x"</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that in the last example above, the string <span class="docEmphasis">-x</span> was interpreted as an argument to the <span class="docEmphasis">-p</span> option, rather than as an option.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E1MJM">Example B-1. Using <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>getopt/t_getopt.c</b>
#include &lt;ctype.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

#define printable(ch) (isprint((unsigned char) ch) ? ch : '#')

static void             /* Print "usage" message and exit */
usageError(char *progName, char *msg, int opt)
{
    if (msg != NULL &amp;&amp; opt != 0)
        fprintf(stderr, "%s (-%c)\n", msg, printable(opt));
    fprintf(stderr, "Usage: %s [-p arg] [-x]\n", progName);
    exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int opt, xfnd;
    char *pstr;

    xfnd = 0;
    pstr = NULL;

    while ((opt = getopt(argc, argv, ":p:x")) != -1) {
        printf("opt =%3d (%c); optind = %d", opt, printable(opt), optind);
        if (opt == '?' || opt == ':')
            printf("; optopt =%3d (%c)", optopt, printable(optopt));
        printf("\n");

        switch (opt) {
        case 'p': pstr = optarg;        break;
        case 'x': xfnd++;               break;
        case ':': usageError(argv[0], "Missing argument", optopt);
        case '?': usageError(argv[0], "Unrecognized option", optopt);
        default:  fatal("Unexpected case in switch()");
        }
    }

    if (xfnd != 0)
        printf("-x was specified (count=%d)\n", xfnd);
    if (pstr != NULL)
        printf("-p was specified with the value \"%s\"\n", pstr);
    if (optind &lt; argc)
        printf("First nonoption argument is \"%s\" at argv[%d]\n",
                argv[optind], optind);
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
      <b>getopt/t_getopt.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EHNJM">B.1.1.2. GNU-specific behavior</h5><p class="docText">By default, the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> implementation of <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span>
 implements a nonstandard feature: it allows options and nonoptions to 
be intermingled. Thus, for example, the following are equivalent:</p><pre>$ <b>ls -l file</b>
$ <b>ls file -l</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><a name="second form"></a>In processing command lines of the second form, <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span> permutes the contents of <span class="docEmphasis">argv</span> so that all options are moved to the beginning of the array and all nonoptions are moved to the end of the array. (If <span class="docEmphasis">argv</span> contains an element pointing to the word <tt>--</tt>, then only the elements preceding that element are subject to permutation and interpretation as options.) In other words, the <tt>const</tt> declaration of <span class="docEmphasis">argv</span> in the <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span> prototype shown earlier is not actually true for <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>.</p><p class="docText">Permuting the contents of <span class="docEmphasis">argv</span> is not permitted by SUSv3 (or SUSv4). We can force <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span>
 to provide standards-conformant behavior (i.e., to follow the rules 
listed earlier for determining the end of the option list) by setting 
the environment variable <tt>POSIXLY_CORRECT</tt> to any value. This can be done in two ways:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">From within the program, we can call <span class="docEmphasis">putenv()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">setenv()</span>.
 This has the advantage that the user is not required to do anything. It
 has the disadvantages that it requires modifications of the program 
source code and that it changes the behavior of only that program.</p></li><li><p class="docList">We can define the variable from the shell before we execute the program:</p><pre>$ <b>export POSIXLY_CORRECT=y</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docList">This method has the advantage that it affects all programs that use <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span>. However, it also has some disadvantages. <tt>POSIXLY_CORRECT</tt>
 causes other changes in the behavior of various Linux tools. 
Furthermore, setting this variable requires explicit user intervention 
(most likely by setting the variable in a shell startup file).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">An alternative method of preventing <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span> from permuting command-line arguments is to make the first character of <span class="docEmphasis">optstring</span> a plus sign (<tt>+</tt>). (If we want to also suppress <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span> error messages as described above, then the first two characters of <span class="docEmphasis">optstring</span> should be <tt>+:</tt>, in that order.) As with the use of <span class="docEmphasis">putenv()</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">setenv()</span>, this approach has the disadvantage that it requires changes to the program code. See the <span class="docEmphasis">getopt(3)</span> manual page for further details.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">A future technical corrigendum of SUSv4 is likely to add a specification for the use of the plus sign in <span class="docEmphasis">optstring</span> to prevent permutation of command-line arguments.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Note that the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc getopt()</span>
 permuting behavior affects how we write shell scripts. (This affects 
developers porting shell scripts from other systems to Linux.) Suppose 
we have a shell script that performs the following command on all of the
 files in a directory:</p><pre>chmod 644 *</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If one of these filenames starts with a hyphen, then the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc getopt()</span> permuting behavior would cause that filename to be interpreted as an option to <span class="docEmphasis">chmod</span>. This would not happen on other UNIX implementations, where the occurrence of the first nonoption (<tt>644</tt>) ensures that <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span> ceases looking for options in the remainder of the command line. For most commands, (if we don’t set <tt>POSIXLY_CORRECT</tt>, then) the way of dealing with this possibility in shell scripts that must run on Linux is to place the string <tt>--</tt> before the first nonoption argument. Thus, we would rewrite the above line as follows:</p><pre>chmod -- 644 *</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In this particular example, which employs filename generation, we could alternatively write this:</p><pre>chmod 644 ./*</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Although we have used 
the example of filename pattern matching (globbing) above, similar 
scenarios can also occur as a result of other shell processing (e.g., 
command substitution and parameter expansion), and they can be dealt 
with similarly, by using a <tt>--</tt> string to separate options from arguments.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E4RJM">B.1.1.3. GNU extensions</h5><p class="docText">The GNU C library provides a number of extensions to <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span>. We briefly note the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The SUSv3 specification permits options to have only mandatory arguments. In the GNU version of <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span>, we can place two colons after an option character in <span class="docEmphasis">optstring</span>
 to indicate that its argument is optional. The argument to such an 
option must appear in the same word as the option itself (i.e., no 
spaces may appear between the option and its argument). If the argument 
is not present, then, on return from <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">optarg</span> is set to <tt>NULL</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Many
 GNU commands allow a form of long option syntax. A long option begins 
with two hyphens, and the option itself is identified using a word, 
rather than a single character, as in the following example:</p><pre>$ <b>gcc --version</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> function <span class="docEmphasis">getopt_long()</span> can be used to parse such options.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The GNU C library provides an even more sophisticated (but nonportable) API for parsing the command-line, called <span class="docEmphasis">argp</span>. This API is described in the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> manual.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
