<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Appendix C. Casting the NULL Pointer</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h2 class="docAppendixTitle" id="title-ID0ECLJM">Appendix C. Casting the <tt>NULL</tt> Pointer</h2><p class="docText">Consider the following call to the variadic function <span class="docEmphasis">execl()</span>:</p><pre>execl("ls", "ls", "-l", (char *) NULL);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">A <span class="docEmphasis">variadic function</span> is one that takes a variable number of arguments or arguments of varying types.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Whether the cast is required before the <tt>NULL</tt>
 in cases like this is the source of some confusion. While we can often 
get away without the cast, the C standards require it; failure to 
include it may lead an application to break on some systems.</p><p class="docText"><tt>NULL</tt> is typically defined as either 0 or as <span class="docEmphasis">(void *) 0</span>.
 (The C standards allow other definitions, but they are essentially 
equivalent to one of these two possibilities.) The main reason casts are
 needed is that <tt>NULL</tt> is allowed to be defined as 0, so this is the case we examine first.</p><p class="docText">The C preprocessor translates <tt>NULL</tt>
 to 0 before the source code is passed to the compiler. The C standards 
specify that the integer constant 0 may be used in any context where a 
pointer may be used, and the compiler will ensure that this value is 
treated as a null pointer. In most cases, everything is fine, and we 
don’t need to worry about casts. We can, for example, write code such as
 the following:</p><pre>int *p;

p = 0;                                  /* Assign null pointer to 'p' */
p = NULL;                               /* Same as 'p = 0' */</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The above assignments work
 because the compiler can determine that a pointer value is required on 
the right-hand side of the assignment, and it will convert the value 0 
to a null pointer.</p><p class="docText">Similarly, for functions with prototypes specifying a fixed argument list, we can specify either 0 or <tt>NULL</tt> for a pointer argument, to indicate that a null pointer should be passed to the function:</p><pre>sigaction(SIGINT, &amp;sa, 0);
sigaction(SIGINT, &amp;sa, NULL);           /* Equivalent to the preceding */</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">If
 we are passing a null pointer to an old-style, nonprototyped C 
function, then all of the arguments given here about the need to 
appropriately cast 0 or <tt>NULL</tt> also apply, regardless of whether the argument is part of a variadic argument list.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Because
 casting is not required in any of the above examples, one might 
conclude that it is never required. But this is wrong. The need for 
casting arises when specifying a null pointer as one of the varying 
arguments in a call to a variadic function such as <span class="docEmphasis">execl()</span>. To realize why this is necessary, we need to be aware of the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The compiler can’t determine the expected types of the varying arguments of a variadic function.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The
 C standards don’t require that a null pointer is actually represented 
in the same way as the integer constant 0. (In theory, a null pointer 
could be represented by any bit pattern that wasn’t the same as a valid 
pointer.) Nor do the standards even require that a null pointer is the 
same size as the integer constant 0. All that the standards require is 
that when the integer constant 0 is found in a context where a pointer 
is expected, the 0 should be interpreted as a null pointer.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Consequently, it is wrong to write either of the following:</p><pre>execl(prog, arg, 0);
execl(prog, arg, NULL);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This is an error because the compiler will pass the integer constant 0 to <span class="docEmphasis">execl()</span>, and there is no guarantee that this is equivalent to a null pointer.</p><p class="docText">In
 practice, we can often get away without the cast, since, on many C 
implementations (e.g., Linux/x86-32), the representations of the integer
 (<span class="docEmphasis">int</span>)
 constant 0 and the null pointer are the same. However, there are 
implementations where they are not—for example, where the size of a null
 pointer is larger than the size of the integer constant 0—so that in 
the above examples, <span class="docEmphasis">execl()</span>
 is likely to receive some random bits adjacent to the integer 0, and 
the resulting value will be interpreted as a random (nonnull) pointer. 
Omitting the cast leads to programs breaking when ported to such 
implementations. (On some of the aforementioned implementations, <tt>NULL</tt> is defined as the <span class="docEmphasis">long</span> integer constant <span class="docEmphasis">0L</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">long</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">void *</span> have the same size, which may save wrongly constructed programs that use the second of the <span class="docEmphasis">execl()</span> calls above.) Therefore, we should rewrite the above <span class="docEmphasis">execl()</span> calls in the following ways:</p><pre>execl(prog, arg, (char *) 0);
execl(prog, arg, (char *) NULL);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Casting <tt>NULL</tt> in the manner of the last call above is generally required, even on implementations where <tt>NULL</tt> is defined as <span class="docEmphasis">(void *) 0</span>.
 This is because, although the C standards require that null pointers of
 different types should test true for comparisons on equality, they 
don’t require that pointers of different types have the same internal 
representation (although on most implementations they do). And, as 
before, in a variadic function, the compiler can’t cast <span class="docEmphasis">(void *) 0</span> to a null pointer of the appropriate type.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The
 C standards make one exception to the rule that pointers of different 
types need not have the same representation: pointers of the types <span class="docEmphasis">char *</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">void *</span> are required to have the same internal representation. This means that passing <span class="docEmphasis">(void *) 0</span> instead of <span class="docEmphasis">(char *) 0</span> would not be a problem in the example case of <span class="docEmphasis">execl()</span>, but, in the general case, a cast is needed.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
