<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Appendix D. Kernel Configuration</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h2 class="docAppendixTitle" id="title-ID0E5MJM">Appendix D. Kernel Configuration</h2><p class="docText">Many
 features of the Linux kernel are components that can be optionally 
configured. Before compiling the kernel, these components can be 
disabled, enabled, or, in many cases, enabled as loadable kernel 
modules. One reason to disable an unneeded component is to reduce the 
size of the kernel binary, and thus save memory, if the component is not
 required. Enabling a component as a loadable module means that it will 
be loaded into memory only if it is required at run time. This likewise 
can save memory.</p><p class="docText">Kernel configuration is done by executing one of a few different <span class="docEmphasis">make</span> commands in the root directory of the kernel source tree—for example, <span class="docEmphasis">make menuconfig</span>, which provides a <span class="docEmphasis">curses</span>-style configuration menu, or, more comfortably, <span class="docEmphasis">make xconfig</span>, which provides a graphical configuration menu. These commands produce a <tt>.config</tt>
 file in the root directory of the kernel source tree that is then used 
during kernel compilation. This file contains the settings of all 
configuration options.</p><p class="docText">The value of each option that is enabled is shown in the <tt>.config</tt> file in a line of the following form:</p><pre>CONFIG_<span class="docEmphasis">NAME</span>=<span class="docEmphasis">value</span></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If an option is not set, then the file contains a line of this form:</p><pre># CONFIG_<span class="docEmphasis">NAME</span> is not set</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In the <tt>.config</tt> file, lines beginning with a <tt>#</tt> character are comments.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Throughout this book, when we describe kernel options, we won’t describe precisely where in the <span class="docEmphasis">menuconfig</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">xconfig</span> menu the option can be found. There are a few reasons for this:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The location can often be determined fairly intuitively by navigating through the menu hierarchy.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The location of configuration options does change over time, as the menu hierarchy is restructured across kernel versions.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If we can’t find the location of a particular option within the menu hierarchy, then both <span class="docEmphasis">make menuconfig</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">make xconfig</span> provide search facilities. For example, we can search for the string <tt>CONFIG_INOTIFY</tt> to find the option for configuring support for the <span class="docEmphasis">inotify</span> API.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The configuration options that were used to build the currently running kernel are viewable via the <tt>/proc/config.gz</tt> virtual file, a compressed file whose contents are the same as the <tt>.config</tt> file that was used to build the kernel. This file can be viewed using <span class="docEmphasis">zcat(1)</span> and searched using <span class="docEmphasis">zgrep(1)</span>.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
