<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>E.1. </title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">E.1. </h3><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EYQJM">E.1.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E3QJM">E.1.1.1. Manual pages</h5><p class="docText">Manual pages are accessible via the <span class="docEmphasis">man</span> command. (The command <span class="docEmphasis">man man</span> describes how to use <span class="docEmphasis">man</span> to read manual pages.) The manual pages are divided into numbered sections that categorize information as follows:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Programs and shell commands</span>: commands executed by users at the shell prompt.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">System calls</span>: Linux system calls.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Library functions</span>: standard C library functions (as well as many other library functions).</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Special files</span>: special files, such as device files.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">File formats</span>: formats of files such as the system password (<tt>/etc/passwd</tt>) and group (<tt>/etc/group</tt>) files.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Games</span>: games.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Overview, conventions, protocols, and miscellany</span>: overviews of various topics, and various pages on network protocols and sockets programming.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">System administration commands</span>: commands that are for use mainly by the superuser.</p></div></li></ol></div><p class="docText">In
 some cases, there are manual pages in different sections with the same 
name. For example, there is a section 1 manual page for the <span class="docEmphasis">chmod</span> command and a section 2 manual page for the <span class="docEmphasis">chmod()</span>
 system call. To distinguish manual pages with the same name, we enclose
 the section number in parentheses after the name—for example, <span class="docEmphasis">chmod(1)</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">chmod(2)</span>. To display the manual page from a particular section, we can insert the section number into the <span class="docEmphasis">man</span> command:</p><pre>$ <b>man 2 chmod</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The manual pages for system calls and library functions are divided into a number of parts, which usually include the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Name</span>:
 the name of the function, accompanied by a one-line description. The 
following command can be used to obtain a list of all manual pages whose
 one-line description contains the specified string:</p><pre>$ <b>man -k</b> <b><tt><i>string</i></tt></b></pre><br/>
<p class="docList">This is useful if we can’t remember or don’t know exactly which manual page we’re looking for.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Synopsis</span>:
 the C prototype of the function. This identifies the type and order of 
the function’s arguments, as well as the type of value returned by the 
function. In most cases, a list of header files precedes the function 
prototype. These header files define macros and C types needed for use 
with this function, as well as the function prototype itself, and should
 be included in a program using this function.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Description</span>: a description of what the function does.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Return value</span>: a description of the range of values returned by the function, including how the function informs the caller of an error.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Errors</span>: a list of the possible <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> values that are returned in the event of an error.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Conforming to</span>:
 a description of the various UNIX standards to which the function 
conforms. This gives us an idea of how portable this function is to 
other UNIX implementations and also identifies Linux-specific aspects of
 the function.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Bugs</span>: a description of things that are broken or that don’t work as they should.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Although
 some of the later commercial UNIX implementations have preferred more 
marketable euphemisms, from early times, the UNIX manual pages called a 
bug a bug. Linux continues the tradition. Sometimes these “bugs” are 
philosophical, simply describing ways in which things could be improved,
 or warning about special or unexpected (but otherwise intended) 
behaviors.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Notes</span>: miscellaneous additional notes on the function.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">See also</span>: a list of manual pages for related functions and commands.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The manual pages describing the kernel and <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> APIs are available online at http://www.kernel.org/doc/man-pages/.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EPVJM">E.1.1.2. GNU <span class="docEmphasis">info</span> documents</h5><p class="docText">Rather than using the traditional manual page format, the GNU project documents much of its software using <span class="docEmphasis">info</span> documents, which are hyperlinked documents that can be browsed using the <span class="docEmphasis">info</span> command. A tutorial on the use of <span class="docEmphasis">info</span> can be obtained using the command <span class="docEmphasis">info info</span>.</p><p class="docText">Although in many cases the information in manual pages and corresponding <span class="docEmphasis">info</span> documents is the same, sometimes the <span class="docEmphasis">info</span> documentation for the C library contains additional information not found in the manual pages or vice versa.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The reasons both manual pages and <span class="docEmphasis">info</span> documents exist, even though both may contain the same information, are somewhat religious. The GNU project prefers the <span class="docEmphasis">info</span> user interface, and so provides all documentation via <span class="docEmphasis">info</span>.
 However, users and programmers on UNIX systems have had a long history 
of using (and in many cases preferring) manual pages, so there is strong
 momentum in favor of upholding this format. The manual pages also tend 
to include more historical information (e.g., information about behavior
 changes across versions) than do the <span class="docEmphasis">info</span> documents.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EBYJM">E.1.1.3. The GNU C library (<span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>) manual</h5><p class="docText">The GNU C library includes a manual that describes the use of many of the functions in the library. The manual is available at http://www.gnu.org/. It is also provided with most distributions in both HTML format and <span class="docEmphasis">info</span> format (via the command <span class="docEmphasis">info libc</span>).</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ERYJM">E.1.1.4. Books</h5><p class="docText">An extensive bibliography can be found at the end of this book, but a few books deserve special mention.</p><p class="docText">At the top of the list are the books by the late W. Richard Stevens. <span class="docEmphasis">Advanced Programming in the UNIX Environment</span>
 ([Stevens, 1992]) provides detailed coverage of UNIX system 
programming, focusing on POSIX, System V, and BSD. A recent revision by 
Stephen Rago, [Stevens &amp; Rago, 2005] updates the text for modern 
standards and implementations, and adds coverage of threads and a 
chapter on network programming. This book is a good place to look for an
 alternative viewpoint on many of the topics covered in this book. The 
two-volume <span class="docEmphasis">UNIX Network Programming</span>
 ([Stevens et al., 2004], [Stevens, 1999]) provides extremely detailed 
coverage of network programming and interprocess communication on UNIX 
systems.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">[Stevens
 et al., 2004] is a revision by Bill Fenner and Andrew Rudoff of 
[Stevens, 1998], the previous edition of Volume 1 of the <span class="docEmphasis">UNIX Network Programming</span>.
 While the revised edition covers several new areas, in most cases where
 we make reference to [Stevens et al., 2004], the same material can also
 be found in [Stevens, 1998], albeit under different chapter and section
 numbers.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Advanced UNIX Programming</span>
 ([Rochkind, 1985]) was a good, brief, and sometimes humorous, 
introduction to UNIX (System V) programming. It is nowadays available in
 an updated and extended second edition ([Rochkind, 2004]).</p><p class="docText">The POSIX threading API is thoroughly described in <span class="docEmphasis">Programming with POSIX Threads</span> ([<span class="docEmphasis">Butenhof</span>, 1996]).</p><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Linux and the Unix Philosophy</span> ([Gancarz, 2003]) is a brief introduction to the philosophy of application design on Linux and UNIX systems.</p><p class="docText">Various books provide an introduction to reading and modifying the Linux kernel sources, including <span class="docEmphasis">Linux Kernel Development</span> ([Love, 2010]) and <span class="docEmphasis">Understanding the Linux Kernel</span> ([Bovet &amp; Cesati, 2005]).</p><p class="docText">For more general background on UNIX kernels, <span class="docEmphasis">The Design of the UNIX Operating System</span> ([Bach, 1986]) remains very readable and contains material relevant to Linux. <span class="docEmphasis">UNIX Internals: The New Frontiers</span> ([Vahalia, 1996]) surveys kernel internals for more modern UNIX implementations.</p><p class="docText">For writing Linux device drivers, the essential reference is <span class="docEmphasis">Linux Device Drivers</span> ([Corbet et al., 2005]).</p><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Operating Systems: Design and Implementation</span> ([Tanenbaum &amp; Woodhull, 2006]) describes operating system implementation using the example of Minix. (See also http://www.minix3.org/.)</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EJ1JM">E.1.1.5. Source code of existing applications</h5><p class="docText">Looking
 at the source code of existing applications can often provide good 
examples of how to use particular system calls and library functions. On
 Linux distributions employing the RPM Package Manager, we can find the 
package that contains a particular program (such as <span class="docEmphasis">ls</span>) as follows:</p><pre>$ <b>which ls </b>                      <i> Find pathname of</i> <span class="docEmphasis">ls</span> <i> program</i>
/bin/ls
$ <b>rpm -qf /bin/ls </b>
               <i> Find out which package created the pathname</i> /bin/ls
coreutils-5.0.75</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The corresponding source code package will have a name similar to the above, but with the suffix <tt>.src.rpm</tt>.
 This package will be on the installation media for the distribution or 
be available for download from the distributor’s web site. Once we 
obtain the package, we can install it using the <span class="docEmphasis">rpm</span> command, and then examine the source code, which is typically placed in some directory under <tt>/usr/src</tt>.</p><p class="docText">On
 systems using the Debian package manager, the process is similar. We 
can determine the package that created a pathname (for the <span class="docEmphasis">ls</span> program, in this example) using the following command:</p><pre>$ <b>dpkg -S /bin/ls</b>
coreutils: /bin/ls</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EY3JM">E.1.1.6. The Linux Documentation Project</h5><p class="docText">The Linux Documentation Project (http://www.tldp.org/)
 produces freely available documentation on Linux, including HOWTO 
guides and FAQs (frequently asked questions and answers) on various 
system administration and programming topics. The site also offers more 
extensive electronic books on a range of topics.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EF4JM">E.1.1.7. The GNU project</h5><p class="docText">The GNU project (http://www.gnu.org/) provides an enormous quantity of software source code and associated documentation.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ES4JM">E.1.1.8. Newsgroups</h5><p class="docText">Usenet
 newsgroups can often be a good source of answers to specific 
programming questions. The following newsgroups are of particular 
interest:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">comp.unix.programmer</span> addresses general UNIX programming questions.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">comp.os.linux.development.apps</span> addresses questions relating to application development specifically on Linux.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">comp.os.linux.development.system</span>
 the Linux system development newsgroup, focuses on questions about 
modifying the kernel and developing device drivers and loadable modules.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">comp.programming.threads</span> discusses programming with threads, especially POSIX threads.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">comp.protocols.tcp-ip</span> discusses the TCP/IP networking protocol suite.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">FAQs for many Usenet news groups can be found at http://www.faqs.org/.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Before
 posting a question to a newsgroup, check the FAQ for the group (often 
posted regularly within the group itself) and to try a web search to 
find a solution to the question. The http://groups.google.com/ web site provides a browser-based interface for searching old Usenet postings.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EZ5JM">E.1.1.9. Linux kernel mailing list</h5><p class="docText">The
 Linux kernel mailing list (LKML) is the principal broadcast 
communication medium for the Linux kernel developers. It provides an 
idea of what’s going on in kernel development, and is a forum for 
submitting kernel bug reports and patches. (LKML is not a forum for 
system programming questions.) To subscribe to LKML, send an email 
message to majordomo@vger.kernel.org with the following message body as a single line:</p><pre>subscribe linux-kernel</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">For information about the workings of the list server, send a message body containing just the word “help” to the same address.</p><p class="docText">To send a message to LKML, use the address linux-kernel@vger.kernel.org. The FAQ and pointers to some searchable archives for this mailing list are available at http://www.kernel.org/.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E26JM">E.1.1.10. Web sites</h5><p class="docText">The following web sites are of particular interest:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">http://www.kernel.org/, <span class="docEmphasis">The Linux Kernel Archives</span>, contains the source code for all versions of the Linux kernel, past and present.</p></li><li><p class="docList">http://www.lwn.net/, <span class="docEmphasis">Linux Weekly News</span>,
 provides daily and weekly columns on various Linux-related topics. A 
weekly kernel-development column summarizes traffic through LKML.</p></li><li><p class="docList">http://www.kernelnewbies.org/, <span class="docEmphasis">Linux Kernel Newbies</span>, is a starting point for programmers who want to learn about and modify the Linux kernel.</p></li><li><p class="docList">http://lxr.linux.no/linux/, <span class="docEmphasis">Linux Cross-reference</span>,
 provides browser access to various versions of the Linux kernel source 
code. Each identifier in a source file is hyperlinked to make it easy to
 find the definition and uses of that identifier.</p></li></ul><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ECBKM">E.1.1.11. The kernel source code</h5><p class="docText">If
 none of the preceding sources answer our questions, or if we want to 
confirm that documented information is true, then we can read the kernel
 source code. Although parts of the source code can be difficult to 
understand, reading the code of a particular system call in the Linux 
kernel source (or a library function in the GNU C library source) can 
often prove to be a surprisingly quick way to find the answer to a 
question.</p><p class="docText">If the Linux kernel source code has been installed on the system, it can usually be found in the directory <tt>/usr/src/linux</tt>. Table E-1 provides summary information about some of the subdirectories under this directory.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table E-1. Subdirectories in the Linux kernel source tree</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Directory</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Contents</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>Documentation</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Documentation of various aspects of the kernel</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>arch</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Architecture-specific code, organized into subdirectories—for example, <tt>alpha</tt>, <tt>arm</tt>, <tt>ia64</tt>, <tt>sparc</tt>, and <tt>x86</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>drivers</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Code for device drivers</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>fs</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">File system-specific code, organized into subdirectories—for example, <tt>btrfs</tt>, <tt>ext4</tt>, <tt>proc</tt> (the <tt>/proc</tt> file system), and <tt>vfat</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>include</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Header files needed by kernel code</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>init</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Initialization code for the kernel</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ipc</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Code for System V IPC and POSIX message queues</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>kernel</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Code related to processes, program execution, kernel modules, signals, time, and timers</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>lib</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">General-purpose functions used by various parts of the kernel</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>mm</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Memory-management code</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>net</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Networking code (TCP/IP, UNIX and Internet domain sockets)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>scripts</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Scripts to configure and build the kernel</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
