<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>F.1. </title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">F.1. </h3><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6VJM">F.1.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EDWJM">F.1.1.1. Chapter 5</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>fileio/atomic_append.c</tt>
 in the source code distribution for this book. Here is an example of 
the results that we see when we run this program as suggested:</p><pre>$ <b>ls -l f1 f2</b>
-rw-------    1 mtk      users     2000000 Jan  9 11:14 f1
-rw-------    1 mtk      users     1999962 Jan  9 11:14 f2</pre><br/>
<p class="docList">Because the combination of <span class="docEmphasis">lseek()</span> plus <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> is not atomic, one instance of the program sometimes overwrote bytes written by the other instance. As a result, the file <tt>f2</tt> contains less than 2 million bytes.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A call to <span class="docEmphasis">dup()</span> can be rewritten as:</p><pre>fd = fcntl(oldfd, F_DUPFD, 0);</pre><br/>
<p class="docList">A call to <span class="docEmphasis">dup2()</span> can be rewritten as:</p><pre>if (oldfd == newfd) {                /* oldfd == newfd is a special case */
    if (fcntl(oldfd, F_GETFL) == -1) {                /* Is oldfd valid? */
        errno = EBADF;
        fd = -1;
    } else {
        fd = oldfd;
    }
} else {
    close(newfd);
    fd = fcntl(oldfd, F_DUPFD, newfd);
}</pre><br/>
</div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The first point to realize is that, since <span class="docEmphasis">fd2</span> is a duplicate of <span class="docEmphasis">fd1</span>, they both share a single open file description, and thus a single file offset. However, because <span class="docEmphasis">fd3</span> is created via a separate call to <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>, it has a separate file offset.</p><ul><li><p class="docList">After the first <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>, the file contents are <tt>Hello</tt>,.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Since <span class="docEmphasis">fd2</span> shares a file offset with <span class="docEmphasis">fd1</span>, the second <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> call appends to the existing text, yielding <tt>Hello, world</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">lseek()</span> call adjusts the single file offset shared by <span class="docEmphasis">fd1</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">fd2</span> to point to the start of the file, and thus the third <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> call overwrites part of the existing text to yield <tt>HELLO, world</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The file offset for <span class="docEmphasis">fd3</span> has not so far been modified, and so points to the start of the file. Therefore, the final <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> call changes the file contents to <tt>Gidday world</tt>.</p></li></ul><p class="docList">Run the program <tt>fileio/multi_descriptors.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book to see these results.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EB1JM">F.1.1.2. Chapter 6</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Since the array <span class="docEmphasis">mbuf</span>
 is not initialized, it is part of the uninitialized data segment. 
Therefore, no disk space is required to hold this variable. Instead, it 
is allocated (and initialized to 0) when the program is loaded.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A demonstration of the incorrect usage of <span class="docEmphasis">longjmp()</span> is provided in the file <tt>proc/bad_longjmp.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Sample implementations of <span class="docEmphasis">setenv()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">unsetenv()</span> are provided in the file <tt>proc/setenv.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EF3JM">F.1.1.3. Chapter 8</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The two <span class="docEmphasis">getpwnam()</span> calls are executed before the <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> output string is constructed, and—since <span class="docEmphasis">getpwnam()</span> returns its result in a statically allocated buffer—the second call overwrites the result returned by the first call.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E13JM">F.1.1.4. Chapter 9</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">In considering the following, remember that changes to the effective user ID always also change the file-system user ID.</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">real=2000, effective=2000, saved=2000, file-system=2000</span></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">real=1000, effective=2000, saved=2000, file-system=2000</span></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">real=1000, effective=2000, saved=0, file-system=2000</span></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">real=1000, effective=0, saved=0, file-system=2000</span></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">real=1000, effective=2000, saved=3000, file-system=2000</span></p></div></li></ol></div></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Strictly
 speaking, such a process is unprivileged, since its effective user ID 
is nonzero. However, an unprivileged process can use the <span class="docEmphasis">setuid()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">setreuid()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">seteuid()</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">setresuid()</span>
 calls to set its effective user ID to the same value as its real user 
ID or saved set-user-ID. Thus, this process could use one of these calls
 to regain privilege.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The following code shows the steps for each system call.</p><pre>e = geteuid();     /* Save initial value of effective user ID */

setuid(getuid());                         /* Suspend privileges */
setuid(e);                                /* Resume privileges */
/* Can't permanently drop the set-user-ID identity with setuid() */

seteuid(getuid());                        /* Suspend privileges */
seteuid(e);                               /* Resume privileges */
/* Can't permanently drop the set-user-ID identity with seteuid() */

setreuid(-1, getuid());                   /* Temporarily drop privileges */
setreuid(-1, e);                          /* Resume privileges */
setreuid(getuid(), getuid());             /* Permanently drop privileges */

setresuid(-1, getuid(), -1);              /* Temporarily drop privileges */
setresuid(-1, e, -1);                     /* Resume privileges */
setresuid(getuid(), getuid(), getuid());  /* Permanently drop privileges */</pre><br/>
</div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">With the exception of <span class="docEmphasis">setuid()</span>, the answers are the same as for the previous exercise, except that we can substitute the value 0 for the variable <span class="docEmphasis">e</span>. For <span class="docEmphasis">setuid()</span>, the following holds:</p><pre>/* (a) Can't suspend and resume privileges with setuid() */

setuid(getuid());          /* (b) Permanently drop privileges */</pre><br/>
</div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EX5JM">F.1.1.5. Chapter 10</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The
 maximum unsigned 32-bit integer value is 4,294,967,295. Divided by 100 
clock ticks per second, this corresponds to slightly more than 497 days.
 Divided by 1 million (<tt>CLOCKS_PER_SEC</tt>), this corresponds to 71 minutes and 35 seconds.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EJ6JM">F.1.1.6. Chapter 12</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>sysinfo/procfs_user_exe.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E26JM">F.1.1.7. Chapter 13</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">This sequence of statements ensures that the data written to a <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffer is flushed to the disk. The <span class="docEmphasis">fflush()</span> call flushes the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffer for <span class="docEmphasis">fp</span> to the kernel buffer cache. The argument given to the subsequent <span class="docEmphasis">fsync()</span> is the file descriptor underlying <span class="docEmphasis">fp</span>; thus, the call flushes the (recently filled) kernel buffer for that file descriptor to disk.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">When standard output is sent to a terminal, it is line-buffered, so that the output of the <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> call appears immediately, and is followed by the output of <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>. When standard output is sent to a disk file, it is block-buffered. Consequently, the output of the <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> is held in a <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffer and is flushed only when the program exits (i.e., after the <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> call). (A complete program containing the code of this exercise is available in the file <tt>filebuff/mix23_linebuff.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.)</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EYBKM">F.1.1.8. Chapter 15</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">stat()</span> system call doesn’t change any file timestamps, since all it does is fetch information from the file i-node (and there is no <span class="docEmphasis">last i-node access</span> timestamp).</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The GNU C library provides just such a function, named <span class="docEmphasis">euidaccess()</span>, in the library source file <tt>sysdeps/posix/euidaccess.c</tt>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">In order to do this, we must use two calls to <span class="docEmphasis">umask()</span>, as follows:</p><pre>mode_t currUmask;

currUmask = umask(0);       /* Retrieve current umask, set umask to 0 */
umask(currUmask);           /* Restore umask to previous value */</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Note, however, that this solution is not thread-safe, since threads share the process umask setting.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>files/chiflag.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EKDKM">F.1.1.9. Chapter 18</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Using <span class="docEmphasis">ls -li</span>
 shows that the executable file has different i-node numbers after each 
compilation. What happens is that the compiler removes (unlinks) any 
existing file with the same name as its target executable, and then 
creates a new file with the same name. It is permissible to unlink an 
executable file. The name is removed immediately, but the file itself 
remains in existence until the process executing it terminates.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The file <tt>myfile</tt> is created in the subdirectory <tt>test</tt>. The <span class="docEmphasis">symlink()</span>
 call creates a relative link in the parent directory. Despite 
appearances, this is a dangling link, since it is interpreted relative 
to the location of the link file, and thus refers to a nonexistent file 
in the parent directory. Consequently, <span class="docEmphasis">chmod()</span> fails with the error <tt>ENOENT</tt> (“No such file or directory”). (A complete program containing the code of this exercise is available in the file <tt>dirs_links/bad_symlink.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.)</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>dirs_links/list_files_readdir_r.c</tt>, which can be found in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>dirs_links/file_type_stats.c</tt>, which can be found in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Using <span class="docEmphasis">fchdir()</span> is more efficient. If we are performing the operation repeatedly within a loop, then with <span class="docEmphasis">fchdir()</span> we can perform one call to <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> before executing the loop, and with <span class="docEmphasis">chdir()</span> we can place the <span class="docEmphasis">getcwd()</span> call outside the loop. Then we are measuring the difference between repeated calls to <span class="docEmphasis">fchdir(fd)</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">chdir(buf)</span>. Calls to <span class="docEmphasis">chdir()</span> are more expensive for two reasons: passing the <span class="docEmphasis">buf</span> argument to the kernel requires a larger data transfer between user space and kernel space, and the pathname in <span class="docEmphasis">buf</span>
 must be resolved to the corresponding directory i-node on each call. 
(Kernel caching of directory entry information reduces the work required
 for the second point, but some work must still be done.)</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ERFKM">F.1.1.10. Chapter 20</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>signals/ignore_pending_sig.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>signals/siginterrupt.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E1HKM">F.1.1.11. Chapter 22</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">As
 with most UNIX implementations, Linux delivers standard signals before 
realtime signals (SUSv3 doesn’t require this). This makes sense, because
 some standard signals indicate critical conditions (e.g., hardware 
exceptions) that a program should deal with as soon as possible.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Replacing <span class="docEmphasis">sigsuspend()</span> plus a signal handler with <span class="docEmphasis">sigwaitinfo()</span> in this program provides a 25 to 40 percent speed improvement. (The exact figure varies somewhat across kernel versions.)</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EPIKM">F.1.1.12. Chapter 23</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A modified program using <span class="docEmphasis">clock_nanosleep()</span> is provided in the file <tt>timers/t_clock_nanosleep.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>timers/ptmr_null_evp.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EJJKM">F.1.1.13. Chapter 24</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The first <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> call creates one new child. Both parent and child carry on to execute the second <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, and thus each creates a further process, making a total of four processes. All four processes carry on to execute the next <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, each creating a further child. Consequently, a total of seven new processes are created.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>procexec/vfork_fd_test.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If we call <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, and then have the child call <span class="docEmphasis">raise()</span> to send itself a signal such as <tt>SIGABRT</tt>, this will yield a core dump file that closely mirrors the state of the parent at the time of the <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">gdb gcore</span> command allows us to perform a similar task for a program, without needing to change the source code.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Add a converse <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span> call in the parent:</p><pre>if (kill(childPid, SIGUSR1) == -1)
    errExit("kill")</pre><br/>
<p class="docList">And in the child, add a converse <span class="docEmphasis">sigsuspend()</span> call:</p><pre>sigsuspend(&amp;origMask);          /* Unblock SIGUSR1, wait for signal */</pre><br/>
</div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EGLKM">F.1.1.14. Chapter 25</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Assuming
 a two’s complement architecture, where -1 is represented by a bit 
pattern with all bits on, then the parent will see an exit status of 255
 (all bits on in the least significant 8 bits, which are all that is 
passed back to the parent when it calls <span class="docEmphasis">wait())</span>. (The presence of the call <span class="docEmphasis">exit(-1)</span>
 in a program is usually a programmer error resulting from confusion 
with the -1 return used to indicate failure of a system call.)</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EYMKM">F.1.1.15. Chapter 26</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>procexec/orphan.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EKNKM">F.1.1.16. Chapter 27</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">execvp()</span> function first fails to exec the file <tt>xyz</tt> in <tt>dir1</tt>, because execute permission is denied. It therefore continues its search in <tt>dir2</tt>, where it successfully execs <tt>xyz</tt>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>procexec/execlp.c</tt> in the source code distribution of this book.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The script specifies the <span class="docEmphasis">cat</span> program as its interpreter. The <span class="docEmphasis">cat</span> program “interprets” a file by printing its contents—in this case with the <span class="docEmphasis">-n</span> (line numbering) option enabled (as though we had entered the command <span class="docEmphasis">cat -n ourscript</span>). Thus, we would see the following:</p><pre>1  #!/bin/cat -n
     2  Hello world</pre><br/>
</div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Two successive <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>
 calls yield a total of three processes related as parent, child, and 
grandchild. Having created the grandchild process, the child immediately
 exits, and is reaped by the <span class="docEmphasis">waitpid()</span> call in the parent. As a consequence of being orphaned, the grandchild is adopted by <span class="docEmphasis">init</span> (process ID of 1). The program doesn’t need to perform a second <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span> call, since <span class="docEmphasis">init</span>
 automatically reaps the zombie when the grandchild terminates. Therein 
lies a possible use for this code sequence: if we need to create a child
 for which we can’t later wait, then this sequence can be used to ensure
 that no zombie results. One example of such a requirement is where the 
parent execs some program that is not guaranteed to perform a wait (and 
we don’t want to rely on setting the disposition of <tt>SIGCHLD</tt> to <tt>SIG_IGN</tt>, since the disposition of an ignored <tt>SIGCHLD</tt> after an <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> is left unspecified by SUSv3).</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The string given to <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> doesn’t include a newline character, and therefore the output is not flushed before the <span class="docEmphasis">execlp()</span> call. The <span class="docEmphasis">execlp()</span> overwrites the existing program’s data segments (as well as the heap and stack), which contain the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffers, and thus the unflushed output is lost.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>SIGCHLD</tt> is delivered to the parent. If the <tt>SIGCHLD</tt> handler attempts to do a <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span>, then the call returns an error (<tt>ECHILD</tt>)
 indicating that there were no children whose status could be returned. 
(This assumes that the parent had no other terminated children. If it 
did, then the <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span> would block; or if <span class="docEmphasis">waitpid()</span> was used with the <tt>WNOHANG</tt> flag, <span class="docEmphasis">waitpid()</span> would return 0.) This is exactly the situation that may arise if a program establishes a handler for <tt>SIGCHLD</tt> before calling <span class="docEmphasis">system()</span>.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E5QKM">F.1.1.17. Chapter 29</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">There
 are two possible outcomes (both permitted by SUSv3): the thread 
deadlocks, blocked while trying to join with itself, or the <span class="docEmphasis">pthread_join()</span> call fails, returning the error <tt>EDEADLK</tt>. On Linux, the latter behavior occurs. Given a thread ID in <span class="docEmphasis">tid</span>, we can prevent such an eventuality using the following code:</p><pre>if (!pthread_equal(tid, pthread_self()))
   pthread_join(tid, NULL);</pre><br/>
</div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">After the main thread terminates, <span class="docEmphasis">threadFunc()</span> will continue working with storage on the main thread’s stack, with unpredictable results.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EXSKM">F.1.1.18. Chapter 31</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>threads/one_time_init.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EJTKM">F.1.1.19. Chapter 33</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The <tt>SIGCHLD</tt>
 signal that is generated on child termination is process-directed. It 
may be delivered to any thread (not necessarily the one that called <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>) that is not blocking the signal.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EEUKM">F.1.1.20. Chapter 34</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Suppose that the program is part of a shell pipeline:</p><pre>$ <b>./ourprog | grep '</b><b><tt><i>some string</i></tt></b><b>'</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docList">The problem is that <span class="docEmphasis">grep</span> will be part of the same process group as <span class="docEmphasis">ourprog</span>, and therefore the <span class="docEmphasis">killpg()</span> call will also terminate the <span class="docEmphasis">grep</span> process. This is probably not desired, and is likely to confuse users. The solution is to use <span class="docEmphasis">setpgid()</span>
 to ensure that the child processes are placed in their own new group 
(the process ID of the first child could be used as the process group ID
 of the group), and then signal that process group. This also removes 
the need for the parent to make itself immune to the signal.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If the <tt>SIGTSTP</tt> signal is unblocked before raising it again, then there is a small window of time (between the calls to <span class="docEmphasis">sigprocmask()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">raise()</span>) during which, if the user types a second suspend character (<span class="docEmphasis">Control-Z</span>), the process will be stopped while still in the handler. Consequently, two <tt>SIGCONT</tt> signals will be required to resume the process.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EYVKM">F.1.1.21. Chapter 35</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>procpri/demo_sched_fifo.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EJXKM">F.1.1.22. Chapter 36</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>procres/rusage_wait.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the files <tt>rusage.c</tt> and <tt>print_rusage.c</tt> in the <tt>procres</tt> subdirectory in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ETYKM">F.1.1.23. Chapter 37</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>daemons/t_syslog.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EFZKM">F.1.1.24. Chapter 38</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Whenever
 a file is modified by an unprivileged user, the kernel clears the 
file’s set-user-ID permission bit. The set-group-ID permission bit is 
similarly cleared if the group-execute permission bit is enabled. (As 
detailed in Section 55.4, the combination of having the set-group-ID bit
 on while the group-execute bit is <span class="docEmphasis">off</span>
 has nothing to do with set-group-ID programs; instead, it is used to 
enable mandatory locking, and for this reason modifications to such a 
file don’t disable the set-group-ID bit.) Clearing these bits ensures 
that if the program file is writable by arbitrary users, then it can’t 
be modified and still retain its ability to give privileges to users 
executing the file. A privileged (<tt>CAP_FSETID</tt>) process can modify a file without the kernel clearing these permission bits.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EB1KM">F.1.1.25. Chapter 44</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>pipes/change_case.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">It
 creates a race condition. Suppose that between the time the server sees
 end-of-file and the time it closes the file reading descriptor, a 
client opens the FIFO for writing (this will succeed without blocking), 
and then writes data to the FIFO <span class="docEmphasis">after</span> the server has closed the reading descriptor. At this point, the client will receive a <tt>SIGPIPE</tt>
 signal, since no process has the FIFO open for reading. Alternatively, 
the client might be able to both open the FIFO and write data to it 
before the server closes the reading descriptor. In this case, the 
client’s data would be lost, and it wouldn’t receive a response from the
 server. As a further exercise, you could try to demonstrate these 
behaviors by making the suggested modification to the server and 
creating a special-purpose client that repeatedly opens the server’s 
FIFOs, sends a message to the server, closes the server’s FIFO, and 
reads the server’s response (if any).</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">One possible solution would be to set a timer on the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> of the client FIFO using <span class="docEmphasis">alarm()</span>,
 as described in Section 23.3. This solution suffers from the drawback 
that the server would still be delayed for the period of the timeout. 
Another possible solution would be to open the client FIFO using the <tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt>
 flag. If this fails, then the server can assume a misbehaving client. 
This latter solution also requires changes to the client, which needs to
 ensure that it opens its FIFO (also using the <tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt> flag) prior to sending a request to the server. For convenience, the client should then turn off the <tt>O_NONBLOCK</tt> flag for the FIFO file descriptor, so that the subsequent <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>
 call blocks. Finally, it is possible to implement a concurrent server 
solution for this application, with the main server process creating a 
child to send the response message to each client. (This would represent
 a rather resource-expensive solution in the case of this simple 
application.)</p><p class="docList">Other 
conditions that are not handled by this server remain. For example, it 
doesn’t handle the possibilities of the sequence number overflowing or a
 misbehaving client requesting large groups of sequence numbers in order
 to produce such overflows. The server also does not handle the 
possibility that the client specifies a negative value for the sequence 
length. Furthermore, a malicious client could create its reply FIFO, and
 then open the FIFO for reading and writing, and fill it with data 
before sending a request to the server; as a consequence, the server 
would be able to successfully open the reply FIFO, but would block when 
it tries to write the reply. As a further exercise, you could try to 
devise strategies for dealing with these possibilities.</p><p class="docList">In Section 44.8, we also noted another limitation that applies to the server in Example 44-7:
 if a client sends a message that contains the wrong number of bytes, 
then the server will be out of step when reading all subsequent client 
messages. One simple way to deal with this problem is to discard the use
 of fixed-length messages in favor of the use of a delimiter character.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EV2KM">F.1.1.26. Chapter 45</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>svipc/t_ftok.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EN3KM">F.1.1.27. Chapter 46</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The value 0 is a valid message queue identifier, but 0 can’t be used as a message type.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E23KM">F.1.1.28. Chapter 47</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>svsem/event_flags.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A
 reserve operation can be implemented by reading a byte from the FIFO. 
Conversely, a release operation can be implemented by writing a byte to 
the FIFO. A conditional reserve operation can be implemented as a 
nonblocking read of a byte from the FIFO.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EP4KM">F.1.1.29. Chapter 48</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Since access to the <span class="docEmphasis">shmp-&gt; cnt</span> value in the <tt>for</tt>
 loop increment step is no longer protected by the semaphore, there is a
 race condition between the writer next updating this value and the 
reader fetching it.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>svshm/svshm_mon.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EN6KM">F.1.1.30. Chapter 49</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>mmap/mmcopy.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E66KM">F.1.1.31. Chapter 50</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>vmem/madvise_dontneed.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ERALM">F.1.1.32. Chapter 52</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>pmsg/mq_notify_sigwaitinfo.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">It would not be safe to make <span class="docEmphasis">buffer</span> global. Once message notification is reenabled in <span class="docEmphasis">threadFunc()</span>, there is a chance that a second notification would be generated while <span class="docEmphasis">threadFunc()</span> is still executing. This second notification could initiate a second thread that executes <span class="docEmphasis">threadFunc()</span> at the same time as the first thread. Both threads would attempt to use the same global <span class="docEmphasis">buffer</span>,
 with unpredictable results. Note that the behavior here is 
implementation-dependent. SUSv3 permits an implementation to 
sequentially deliver notifications to the same thread. However, it is 
also permissible to deliver notifications in separate threads that 
execute concurrently, and this is what Linux does.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EQBLM">F.1.1.33. Chapter 53</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>psem/psem_timedwait.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ECCLM">F.1.1.34. Chapter 55</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The following hold for <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> on Linux:</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A series of shared locks can starve a process waiting to place an exclusive lock.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">There
 are no rules regarding which process is granted the lock. Essentially, 
the lock is granted to the process that is next scheduled. If that 
process happens to be one that obtains a shared lock, then all other 
processes requesting shared locks will also be able to have their 
requests granted simultaneously.</p></div></li></ol></div></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> system call doesn’t detect deadlock. This is true of most <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> implementations, except those that implement <span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span> in terms of <span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">In
 all except early (1.2 and earlier) Linux kernels, the two types of 
locking operate independently, and have no affect on one another.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ENDLM">F.1.1.35. Chapter 57</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">On Linux, the <span class="docEmphasis">sendto()</span> call fails with the error <tt>EPERM</tt>.
 On some other UNIX systems, a different error results. Some other UNIX 
implementations don’t enforce this constraint, letting a connected UNIX 
domain datagram socket receive datagrams from a sender other than its 
peer.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EUELM">F.1.1.36. Chapter 59</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the files <tt>read_line_buf.h</tt> and <tt>read_line_buf.c</tt> in the <tt>sockets</tt> subdirectory in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the files <tt>is_seqnum_v2_sv.c</tt>, <tt>is_seqnum_v2_cl.c</tt>, and <tt>is_seqnum_v2.h</tt> in the <tt>sockets</tt> subdirectory in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the files <tt>unix_sockets.h</tt>, <tt>unix_sockets.c</tt>, <tt>us_xfr_v2.h</tt>, <tt>us_xfr_v2_sv.c</tt>, and <tt>us_xfr_v2_cl.c</tt> in the <tt>sockets</tt> subdirectory in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">In the Internet domain, datagrams from a nonpeer socket are silently discarded.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EIILM">F.1.1.37. Chapter 60</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>sockets/is_echo_v2_sv.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E1ILM">F.1.1.38. Chapter 61</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Since
 the send and receive buffers for a TCP socket have a limited size, if 
the client sent a large quantity of data, then it might fill these 
buffers, at which point a further <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> would (permanently) block the client before it read any of the server’s response.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>sockets/sendfile.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ERJLM">F.1.1.39. Chapter 62</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">tcgetattr()</span> fails if it is applied to a file descriptor that doesn’t refer to a terminal.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>tty/ttyname.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EIKLM">F.1.1.40. Chapter 63</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>altio/select_mq.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A race condition would result. Suppose the following sequence of events: (a) after <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span>
 has informed the program that the self-pipe has data, it performs the 
appropriate actions in response to the signal; (b) another signal 
arrives, and the handler writes a byte to the self-pipe and returns; and
 (c) the main program drains the self-pipe. As a consequence, the 
program misses the signal that was delivered in step (b).</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The <span class="docEmphasis">epoll_wait()</span>
 call blocks, even when the interest list is empty. This can be useful 
in a multithreaded program, where one thread might add a descriptor to 
the <span class="docEmphasis">epoll</span> interest list, while another thread is blocked in an <span class="docEmphasis">epoll_wait()</span> call.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Successive <span class="docEmphasis">epoll_wait()</span>
 calls cycle through the list of ready file descriptors. This is useful 
because it helps prevent file-descriptor starvation, which could occur 
if <span class="docEmphasis">epoll_wait()</span> 
always (for example) returned the lowest-numbered ready file descriptor,
 and that file descriptor always had some input available.</p></div></li></ol></div><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EBMLM">F.1.1.41. Chapter 64</h5><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">First, the child shell process terminates, followed by the <span class="docEmphasis">script</span> parent process. Since the terminal is operating in raw mode, the <span class="docEmphasis">Control-D</span> character is not interpreted by the terminal driver, but is instead passed as a literal character to the <span class="docEmphasis">script</span> parent process, which writes it to the pseudoterminal master. The pseudoterminal slave is operating in canonical mode, so this <span class="docEmphasis">Control-D</span> character is treated as an end-of-file, which causes the child shell’s next <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>
 to return 0, with the result that the shell terminates. The termination
 of the shell closes the only file descriptor referring to the 
pseudoterminal slave. As a consequence, the next <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> by the parent <span class="docEmphasis">script</span> process fails with the error <tt>EIO</tt> (or end-of-file on some other UNIX implementations), and this process then terminates.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">A solution is provided in the file <tt>pty/unbuffer.c</tt> in the source code distribution for this book.</p></div></li></ol></div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
