<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Preface</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>Preface</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>Vue.js 2 is a minimal but powerful framework. It will empower you to quickly prototype small applications, and it won't get in the way when structuring large frontend systems. This is a cookbook and every paragraph is a recipe; just as with a regular cookbook, you can quickly skip to the recipe that interests you or read it cover to cover to become a great chef.<br/>
All the recipes (except a handful) represent working Vue apps, so at the end of the exercise you are never left empty handed. When I wrote them, I tried to give meaningful examples and sprinkle some fun where possible. All the recipes are slightly different when it comes to doing the same thing, so that you will learn something new even when implementing very similar recipes.<br/>
<br/>
This book took about 6 months to write, and even in this short amount of time I had to go back and update pictures and the API that changed, as well as add new concepts. Still, many recipes are imbued with the everlasting concepts of reusability and good engineering, so I like to think that some parts of this will remain with you, the reader, as useful techniques to reuse in your apps.<br/>
Finally, while I made sure to complement every chapter with plenty of picture to illustrate the desired output, I think it is paramount for you to actually type and try out the recipes while learning.<br/>
Have fun building great things!</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
