<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>What this book covers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>What this book covers</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>Chapter 1, <em>Getting Started</em>, is where you create your first Vue application and get familiar with the most common features and development tools.</p>
<p>Chapter 2, <em>Basic Vue.js Features</em>, is where you effortlessly build lists and  forms, and learn how to style them.<br/>
Chapter 3, <em>Transitions and Animations</em>, where you learn how transitions and animations work to bring more life to your apps. You will also integrate with external CSS libraries.</p>
<p>Chapter 4, <em>Components!</em>, <span>is</span> where you realize everything in Vue is a component and you can exploit this to reduce duplication and reuse your code.</p>
<p>Chapter 5, <em>Communicate with the Internet</em>, <span>is</span> where you make your first AJAX call and create forms and a full fledged REST client (and server!).</p>
<p>Chapter 6, <em>Single Page Applications</em>, <span>is</span> where you use vue-router to create static and dynamic routes to create a modern SPA.</p>
<p>Chapter 7, <em>Unit Testing and End-To-End Testing</em>, <span>is</span> where you learn to create professional software by adding Karma, Chai, Moka, Sinon.JS, and nightwatch to make sure you can refactor your app with confidence.</p>
<p>Chapter 8, <em>Organize + Automate + Deploy = Webpack</em>, <span>is</span> where you actually publish your accurately crafted components to npm and learn how Webpack and Vue play together in the process.</p>
<p>Chapter 9, <em>Advanced Vue.js</em>, <span>is</span> where you explore directives, plugins, functional components, and JSX.</p>
<p>Chapter 10, <em>Large Application Patterns with Vuex</em>, <span>is</span> where you structure your application with tested patterns using Vuex to make sure your apps are maintainable and performant.</p>
<p>Chapter 11, <em>Integrating with External Frameworks</em>, <span>is</span> where you build four different applications with Vue and Electron, Firebase, Feathers, and Horizon.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
