<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Introduction</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>Introduction</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>Vue is a very powerful framework but one of its strengths is that it is very lightweight and easy to pick up. As a matter of fact, in the first recipe you will build a simple but functioning program in minutes, with no setup required.</p>
<p>In this chapter, you will learn lists which will help you create web pages where an element is repeated (like a catalog). Furthermore, you will build an interactive page with event listeners.</p>
<p>Some development environments are presented so you can choose the one that suits you better; you will use some debugging tricks that will give you a head start when developing your own code and better insight to kill bugs in your apps.</p>
<p>Please note that, at the time of writing, ES5 is the most well supported standard for JavaScript in browsers. In this chapter, I will use ES5 so you can follow along even if your browser does not support the newer ES6. Remember though that in following chapters ES6 will be used. By now, Chrome is compatible with most ES6 important constructs, but in general you should use <strong>Babel</strong> to make your app compatible with older browsers. Refer to the recipe <em>How to use Babel to compile from ES6</em> in Chapter 8, <em>Organize + Automate + Deploy = Webpack</em>, when you are ready to use Babel.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
