<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>There's more</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>There's more</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>We can leverage that to do something more interesting. If we were aliens and we wanted to greet more than one world at a time, we could write:</p>
<pre>We conquered 5 planets.&lt;br/&gt; <br/>{{'Hello ' + 5 + ' worlds'}}
</pre>
<p>We may lose track of how many worlds we conquer. No problem, we can do math inside the mustaches. Also, let's put <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">Hello</span></kbd> and <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">worlds</span></kbd> outside brackets:</p>
<pre>We conquered {{5 + 2}} planets.&lt;br/&gt; <br/>Hello {{5 + 2}} worlds
</pre>
<p>Having the number of worlds as raw numbers inside the mustaches is just messy. We are going to use data binding to put it inside a named variable inside our instance:</p>
<pre>&lt;div id="app"&gt; <br/>  We conquered {{countWorlds}} planets.&lt;br/&gt; <br/>  Hello {{countWorlds}} worlds <br/>&lt;/div&gt;<br/><br/>new Vue({ <br/>  el:'#app', <br/>  data: { <br/>    countWorlds: 5 + 2 <br/>  } <br/>})
</pre>
<p>This is how tidy applications are done. Now, every time we conquer a planet, we have to edit only the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">countWorlds</span></kbd> variable. In turn, every time we modify this variable, the HTML will be automatically updated.</p>
<p>Congratulations, you completed your first step into the Vue world and are now able to build simple interactive applications with reactive data-binding and string interpolation.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
