<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p><kbd>new Vue({el:'#app'})</kbd> will instantiate a new Vue instance. It accepts an <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">options</span> object as a parameter. This object is central in Vue, and defines and controls data and behavior. It contains all the information needed to create Vue instances and components. In our case, we only specified the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">el</span></kbd> option which accepts a selector or an element as an argument. The <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">#app</span></kbd> parameter is a selector that will return the element in the page with <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">app</span></kbd> as the identifier. For example, in a page like this:</p>
<pre>&lt;!DOCTYPE html&gt; <br/>&lt;html&gt; <br/>  &lt;body&gt; <br/>    &lt;div id="app"&gt;&lt;/div&gt; <br/>  &lt;/body&gt; <br/>&lt;/html&gt;
</pre>
<p>Everything that we will write inside the <kbd>&lt;div&gt;</kbd> with the ID as <kbd>app</kbd> will be under the scope of Vue.</p>
<p>Now, JSFiddle takes everything we write in the HTML quadrant and wraps it in body tags. This means that if we just need to write the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">&lt;div&gt;</span></kbd> in the HTML quadrant, JSFiddle will take care of wrapping it in the body tags.</p>
<div class="epub__packt_tip">It's also important to note that placing the <kbd>#app</kbd> on the <kbd>body</kbd> or <kbd>html</kbd> tag will throw an error, as Vue advises us to mount our apps on normal elements, and its the same thing goes for selecting the <kbd>body</kbd> in the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">el</span></kbd> option.</div>
<p>The mustaches (or handlebars) are a way to tell Vue to take everything inside them and parse it as code. The quotes are a normal way to declare a literal string in JavaScript, so Vue just returns the string concatenation of <span class="epub__VerbatimChar"><kbd>hello</kbd></span> and <span class="epub__VerbatimChar"><kbd>world</kbd></span>. Nothing fancy, we just concatenated two strings and displayed the result.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
