<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>TextEditor</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>TextEditor</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>The rawest way to be up and running is with a text editor and a browser. This is totally legitimate for simple, self contained components.</p>
<p>There are plenty of text editors from which to choose these days. One I like to use is Microsoft Visual Studio Code (<span class="epub__URLPACKT">https://github.com/Microsoft/vscode</span>). There is little difference if you use another, is just so happens that Code has a plugin for Vue:</p>
<ol>
<li>Create a new file called <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">myapp.html</span></kbd>, in which we write:</li>
</ol>
<pre>        &lt;!DOCTYPE html&gt; <br/>        &lt;html&gt; <br/>          &lt;head&gt; <br/>            &lt;title&gt;Vue.js app&lt;/title&gt; <br/>          &lt;/head&gt; <br/>          &lt;body&gt; <br/>            &lt;div id="app"&gt; <br/>              {{'hello world'}} <br/>            &lt;/div&gt; <br/>            &lt;script <br/>              src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax<br/>               /libs/vue/2.0.0/vue.js"&gt;<br/>            &lt;/script&gt; <br/>            &lt;script&gt; <br/>              new Vue({el:'#app'}) <br/>            &lt;/script&gt; <br/>          &lt;/body&gt; <br/>        &lt;/html&gt;
</pre>
<ol start="2">
<li>Open the file you just created in a browser.</li>
</ol>
<p>Vue gets downloaded from https://cdnjs.com/ and the text <kbd>hello world</kbd> should appear (without mustaches--if you see the mustaches, chances are something's gone wrong so check the console for errors).</p>
<p>This approach resembles the JSFiddle one: we have an HTML part, a JavaScript part, and a CSS part on the top. We are just bringing everything under our control. Also, this way we can use Vue developer tools (check out the recipe <em>X-raying your application with Vue developer tools</em> for an introduction of those).</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
