<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Node package manager (npm)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>Node package manager (npm)</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>The canonical way to work with Vue projects, and the one officially supported by the Vue community, involves the use of <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">npm</span> and in particular an npm package named <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">vue-cli</span></kbd>.</p>
<p>If you are not familiar with <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">npm</span>, put it on your list of things to do, especially if you plan to develop with JavaScript extensively.</p>
<p>Briefly stated, npm is a tool to organize and share your code, beyond using other people's code in your projects. More formally, it's a package manager for everything JavaScript. We will use some basic commands now and some more advanced later in the book, but you are invited to learn more by yourself:</p>
<ol>
<li>Install npm. As it's bundled in Node.js, the best route to follow is to install Node.js directly. You will find instructions at <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">https://nodejs.org/en/download/</span>.</li>
<li>After you install npm, open a command line and type <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">npm install -g vue-cli</span></kbd>; this will install <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">vue-cli</span></kbd>. The <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">-g</span></kbd> options stands for globally and it means that wherever you are, you can type <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">vue</span></kbd> and it will run the program.</li>
<li>Create a new directory that will act as a workspace. We will put all of our projects inside it.</li>
<li>Type <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">vue list</span></kbd>; we get all the available templates from the official Vue template repository--other templates can be used from other sources.</li>
</ol>
<p>The <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">simple</span></kbd> template will create a page similar to what we have done a few paragraphs before. I invite you to run <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">vue init simple</span></kbd> and check it out; spot the difference between that and what we have done. What we are doing now instead is a step further. We are going to use a more involved template that includes a bundler. There is one for <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">webpack</span></kbd> and <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">browserify</span></kbd>; we are going with the first.</p>
<p>If you are not familiar with <kbd>webpack</kbd> or <kbd>browserify</kbd> they are programs to control the build process of JavaScript programs from sources and assets (images, css files, and others) to customized bundles. For example, for a single <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">.js</span></kbd> file:</p>
<ol>
<li>Type <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">vue init webpack-simple</span></kbd> and the program will ask you some questions on how you would like your project to be. If you don't know how to answer, press <em>Enter</em> to go with the default.</li>
</ol>
<p style="padding-left: 60px">We could have chosen in an equivalent way the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">browserify-simple</span></kbd> template; those are two different libraries to achieve the same results.</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>Once the scaffolding is complete, type <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">npm install</span></kbd>. This will take care of downloading and installing all the npm packages we need to write our Vue app.</li>
</ol>
<p style="padding-left: 60px">After this, you'll have a functioning demo application already in place.</p>
<ol start="3">
<li>Type <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">npm run dev</span></kbd> to run your application. Further instruction, will appear on the screen and will tell you to visit a specific web address, but there is a good chance that your browser will be opened automatically.</li>
<li>Point the browser at the specified address. You should be able to see the demo application right away.</li>
</ol>
<p>Exploring the source files created by <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">vue-cli</span></kbd>, you will find two notable files. The first file is the entry point for your application, <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">src/main.js</span></kbd>. It will contain something like the following:</p>
<pre>import Vue from 'vue' <br/>import App from './App.vue'<br/><br/>new Vue({ <br/> el: '#app', <br/> render: h =&gt; h(App) <br/>})
</pre>
<p>This code was loaded in the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">index.html</span></kbd> page you just saw. It just tells the main Vue instance to load and render the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">App</span></kbd> component in an element selected by <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">#app</span></kbd> (the element with the attribute <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">id="app"</span></kbd>, a <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">&lt;div&gt;</span></kbd> in our case).</p>
<p>The <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">App.vue</span></kbd> file you will find is a self contained way you can write Vue components. You will find more on components in other recipes, but for now think of it as a way you can further divide your application to keep it more ordered.</p>
<p>The following code is different from what you'll find in the official template but it summarizes the general structure:</p>
<pre>&lt;template&gt; <br/>  &lt;div id="app"&gt; <br/>    &lt;img src="./assets/logo.png"&gt; <br/>    &lt;h1&gt;\{{ msg }}&lt;/h1&gt; <br/>  &lt;/div&gt; <br/>&lt;/template&gt;<br/>&lt;script&gt; <br/>export default { <br/>  data () { <br/>    return { <br/>      msg: 'Hello Vue 2.0!' <br/>    } <br/>  } <br/>} <br/>&lt;/script&gt; <br/>&lt;style&gt; <br/>body { <br/>  font-family: Helvetica, sans-serif; <br/>} <br/>&lt;/style&gt;
</pre>
<p>You can see that having code divided into HTML, JavaScript, and CSS is a recurring pattern. In this file we can see something similar to what we saw in JSFiddle in the first recipes.</p>
<p>In the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">&lt;template&gt;</span></kbd> tag we put our HTML, in the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">&lt;script&gt;</span></kbd> tag JavaScript code and we use the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">&lt;style&gt;</span></kbd> tag to add some styling to our application.</p>
<p>After running <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">npm run dev</span></kbd>, you can try to edit the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">msg</span></kbd> variable in this file; the webpage will reload the component automatically after saving your modifications.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
