<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>The pipe sign indicates that the following is the name of a filter; in our case <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">capitalize</span></kbd> is not in Vue's list of filters, hence the warning. Vue will print the string as is.</p>
<p>What Vue will do before even starting is register our filter (with <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">Vue.filter</span></kbd>) in its asset library. Vue has an the internal <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">filters</span> object and will create a new entry: <kbd>capitalize</kbd>. Every time it sees the pipe symbol it will look for a corresponding filter. Remember to write it before the actual instantiation of a Vue instance because otherwise Vue will not find it.</p>
<p>The working of the filter is very basic JavaScript, in fact, a better way to write this filter with ES6 would be:</p>
<pre>Vue.filter('capitalize', function (string) { <br/>  var [first, ...tail] = string <br/>  return first.toUpperCase() + tail.join('') <br/>})
</pre>
<p>If you are not familiar with ES6, here is a brief explanation. The second line is called a <strong>destructuring</strong> assignment of string; in particular we are interpreting string as an array of characters, separating the first character into first and putting all the other characters in <kbd>tail</kbd>. This is a faster way to assign different parts of an array to multiple variables. The other thing that may seems mysterious is that <kbd>join('')</kbd>. Since <kbd>tail</kbd> is now an array of characters, we need some means to re-join the single letters into a compact string. The argument of <kbd>join</kbd> represents a separator between the single characters. We don't want any, so we pass an empty string.</p>
<p>In the next chapter, you will find more recipe for filters and cover other real use cases.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
