<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Deprecation of $broadcast, $dispatch, and the events option</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>Deprecation of $broadcast, $dispatch, and the events option</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>Both methods <kbd>$broadcast</kbd> and <kbd>$dispatch</kbd> are now merged in the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">$emit</span></kbd> method with the same syntax as the old version. Unfortunately, replacing every instance of <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">$broadcast</span></kbd> and <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">$dispatch</span></kbd> with <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">$emit</span></kbd> is not guaranteed to always work because the pattern used to manage events is a little different now.</p>
<p>In Vue 1, you had events follow a path either downward (for <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">$broadcast</span></kbd>) or upward (for <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">$dispatch</span></kbd>), and horizontally (for <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">$emit</span></kbd>) through the hierarchical tree.</p>
<p>To be honest, I never liked having two (three if you count the old <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">$emit</span></kbd>) methods for emitting events. It was confusing even in the smallest contexts because you had to ask yourself <em>is this event for parents or children?</em> Most of the time it was not that important of a distinction, you just wanted your method to fire. But there is no such thing as a free lunch; we have to add a moving part to our system to make everything work in the new paradigm.</p>
<p>Now all events should pass through one or more central hubs. The role of this central hubs can be taken by a Vue instance since they implement the necessary interface.</p>
<p>When emitting an event consumed by <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">v-on</span></kbd>, you're good to go by replacing <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">$broadcast</span></kbd> with <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">$emit</span></kbd>, since the event doesn't have to travel far. On the other hand, if you are defining an interface for a component in terms of events, you will have to say goodbye to the <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">events</span> option since it will not work anymore. This is the direct consequence of having all the events passing through a hub--the <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">events</span> option wouldn't know where to register all the events. This is the trade off for having a single emitting method: it fires in every direction but only in a precise piping.</p>
<p>Let's say you have a dedicated empty Vue instance that will act as an event hub:</p>
<pre>var eventBus = new Vue()
</pre>
<p>If you are writing a teapot component and you want to register the <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">brew</span> event, you will write in the <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">created</span> hook something like the following:</p>
<pre>new Vue({ <br/>  el: '#app', <br/>  components: { <br/>   comp1: { <br/>         template: '&lt;div/&gt;', <br/>         created () { <br/>         eventBus.$on('brew', () =&gt; { <br/>         console.log('HTTP Error 418: I'm a teapot') <br/>        }) <br/>      } <br/>    }, <br/>    comp2: { <br/>         template: '&lt;div/&gt;', <br/>         created () { <br/>         eventBus.$emit('brew') <br/>      } <br/>    } <br/>  } <br/>})
</pre>
<p>And with the HTML:</p>
<pre>&lt;div id="app"&gt; <br/>  &lt;comp1&gt;&lt;/comp1&gt; <br/>  &lt;comp2&gt;&lt;/comp2&gt; <br/>&lt;/div&gt;
</pre>
<p>Every time the <kbd>brew</kbd> event is emitted with <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">eventBus.$emit('brew')</span></kbd>, the console will output a message.</p>
<div class="epub__packt_infobox">As you can see, this example is not very scalable. You cannot register a lot of events in the <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">created</span> hook and then expect to easily keep track of what they do and in which hub they are registered. For these more involved scenarios, the suggested way to proceed is to use Vuex, introduced in later recipes.</div>
<p>Any component you'll write can act as an event hub. You also have the API methods <span class="epub__VerbatimChar"><kbd>$off</kbd></span> which deletes listeners, and <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">$once</span></kbd>, which listens for an event but only once.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
