<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>There's more...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>There's more...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>Currency often ends up in tables and they need to be aligned; let's see how that will work out. We begin with this HMTL table:</p>
<pre>&lt;div id="app"&gt; <br/>&lt;table&gt; <br/>  &lt;thead&gt; <br/>    &lt;tr&gt; <br/>      &lt;th&gt;Item&lt;/th&gt; <br/>      &lt;th&gt;Price&lt;/th&gt; <br/>    &lt;/tr&gt; <br/>  &lt;/thead&gt; <br/>  &lt;tbody&gt; <br/>    &lt;tr v-for="item in inventory"&gt; <br/>      &lt;td&gt;{{item.name}}&lt;/td&gt; <br/>      &lt;td&gt;{{item.price}} <br/>    &lt;/td&gt; <br/>  &lt;/tr&gt; <br/>  &lt;/tbody&gt; <br/>&lt;/table&gt; <br/>&lt;/div&gt;
</pre>
<p>We are iterating an <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">inventory</span> that, of course, we need to specify in our JavaScript:</p>
<pre>new Vue({ <br/>  el:'#app', <br/>  data: { <br/>    inventory: [ <br/>      {name: 'tape measure', price: '7'}, <br/>      {name: 'stamp', price: '0.01'}, <br/>      {name: 'shark tooth', price: '1.5'}, <br/>      {name: 'iphone', price: '999'} <br/>    ] <br/>  } <br/>})
</pre>
<p>At this point, we have a table with the prices rendered on the page, but there is no currency symbol, no consistency in the number of digits after the decimal point, and no alignment.</p>
<p>We plan to use our filter to help us add all three of these.</p>
<p>Before moving on, the most astute readers may have noted that I used strings to represent the prices. Why not numbers? This is because numbers in JavaScript are floating points; in other words, they are not accurate because the number of decimal digits "floats."</p>
<p>If we have a kitten key chain on sale for 0.83 euros and we have a kitty 50% discount on that, we should sell it for 0.415 euros. Since 0.5 cents do not exist, we will perform some rounding.</p>
<p>A client surfs our online shop and is amazed by our kitty discounts. He buys 3. If you do the math, that would result in 1.245 euros; we apply the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">Math.round</span></kbd> function on it and that should result in 1.25 euros. We can check it with this code:</p>
<pre>Math.round(1.245 * 100) / 100 <br/>// output: 1.25
</pre>
<p>However, consider that we code all our calculations:</p>
<pre>var kittenKeychain = 0.83 <br/>var kittyDiscount = 0.5 <br/>var discountedKittenKeychain = kittenKeychain * kittyDiscount <br/>var boughtKeychains = discountedKittenKeychain * 3 <br/>Math.round(boughtKeychains * 100) / 100 <br/>// outputs: 1.24
</pre>
<p>We lost one cent in the process. Imagine having a big application processing thousands of such transactions, or imagine that this was not a price but an exchange rate. Imagine you have to return this result to the backend and the calculations don't match up. The errors can accumulate and the final number can diverge significantly. This is just a small example, but there is more that can go wrong with floating point numbers when used with money.</p>
<p>Using strings (or integers) to represent currencies gives you the level of precision that you want.</p>
<p>Using our previous filter will introduce the dollar sign and two numbers after the decimal point, but we will still be short of the alignment we want. We should add a new style to our CSS:</p>
<pre>.price { <br/>  text-align: right <br/>}
</pre>
<p>Assigning the class <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">price</span> to the price column will ensure alignment on the point. Here's the complete code:</p>
<pre>&lt;div id="app"&gt; <br/>&lt;table&gt; <br/>  &lt;thead&gt; <br/>    &lt;tr&gt; <br/>      &lt;th&gt;Item&lt;/th&gt; <br/>      &lt;th&gt;Price&lt;/th&gt; <br/>      &lt;/tr&gt; <br/>  &lt;/thead&gt; <br/>  &lt;tbody&gt; <br/>    &lt;tr v-for="item in inventory"&gt; <br/>      &lt;td&gt;{{item.name}}&lt;/td&gt; <br/>      &lt;td class="price"&gt;{{item.price | dollars}}&lt;/td&gt; <br/>    &lt;/tr&gt; <br/>  &lt;/tbody&gt; <br/>&lt;/table&gt; <br/>&lt;/div&gt;
</pre>
<p>Here's the code for the JavaScript:</p>
<pre>Vue.filter('dollars', function (money) { <br/>  return accounting.formatMoney(money) <br/>}) <br/>new Vue({ <br/>  el:'#app', <br/>  data: { <br/>    inventory: [ <br/>      {name: 'tape measure', price: '7'}, <br/>      {name: 'stamp', price: '0.01'}, <br/>      {name: 'shark tooth', price: '1.5'}, <br/>      {name: 'iphone', price: '999'} <br/>    ] <br/>  } <br/>})
</pre>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
