<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How to do it...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How to do it...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>Let's say we are curating an interactive page to learn history. We have our Vue instance with the following JavaScript code:</p>
<pre>new Vue({ <br/>  el:'#app', <br/>  data: { <br/>    bastilleStormingDate: '1789-07-14 17 h' <br/>  } <br/>})
</pre>
<p>In our data, we have a date written informally as a string in our instance data. Our HTML can contain a timeline of the French Revolution and, at some point, can contain the following:</p>
<pre>&lt;div id="app"&gt; <br/>  The Storming of the Bastille, happened on {{bastilleStormingDate | date}} <br/>&lt;/div&gt;
</pre>
<p>We need a filter capable of completing the sentence. For this, one possible library is the excellent <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">moment.js</span></kbd> and, for our purposes, we'll choose the localized version: <span class="epub__URLPACKT">https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/moment.js/2.14.1/moment-with-locales.js</span>.</p>
<p>After adding the library, write the following filter:</p>
<pre>Vue.filter('date', function (date) { <br/>  return moment(date).format('LL') <br/>})
</pre>
<p>This will display a nicely formatted date: <kbd>The Storming of the Bastille, happened on July 14, 1789</kbd>.</p>
<p>What if we want a multi-language site and we would like the date to be formatted in French? The <kbd>moment.js</kbd> library is great with locales; in fact, let's write the same text in French:</p>
<pre>La prise de la Bastille, survenue le {{bastilleStormingDate | date}}
</pre>
<p>We have to amend our filter with the following:</p>
<pre>Vue.filter('date', function (date) { <br/>  moment.locale('fr') <br/>  return moment(date).format('LL') <br/>})
</pre>
<p>Our result is <kbd>La prise de la Bastille, survenue le 14 juillet 1789</kbd>, nice! We don't want to hard-code the language in every page though. It's much better to add a parameter in our filter. We want to be able to pass a variable to the filter with the language, like this:</p>
<pre>La prise de la Bastille, survenue le {{bastilleStormingDate | date('fr')}}
</pre>
<p>To achieve this, we have to add a second parameter to the filter declaration:</p>
<pre>Vue.filter('date', function (date, locale) { <br/>  moment.locale(locale) <br/>  return moment(date).format('LL') <br/>})
</pre>
<p>This way, we can pass the language in a parameter through a variable in the page, for example, depending on the selected language.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
