<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>The <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">v-show</span></kbd> directive evaluates the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">isNight</span></kbd> computed property and puts a <span class="epub__VerbatimChar"><kbd>display: none</kbd></span> in the element <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">style</span></kbd> attribute.</p>
<p>This means that the element is completely rendered by Vue; it's just invisible, like a ghost.</p>
<p>The other directive for displaying elements conditionally is the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">v-if</span></kbd> directive. The behavior is the same as that of <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">v-show</span></kbd> except that you won't find the element in the DOM at all. When <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">v-if</span></kbd> evaluates to <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">true</span></kbd>, the element will be added dynamically, no element styling involved. To try it, just replace the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">v-show</span></kbd> with <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">v-if</span></kbd>:</p>
<pre>&lt;div id="ghost"&gt; <br/>  &lt;div v-if="isNight"&gt; <br/>    I'm a ghost! Boo! <br/>  &lt;/div&gt; <br/>&lt;/div&gt;
</pre>
<p>In general, if it makes no difference, using <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">v-show</span></kbd> is better because it requires fewer resources in the long run. On the other hand, if you are not even sure that some elements will appear on the page, using <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">v-if</span></kbd> will let your users save some CPU time (you never know when your app will go viral and have millions of users; you can save a lot of energy by choosing the right one!).</p>
<p>On a side note, don't wait in front of the page until midnight. Nothing will happen. Computed properties are re-evaluated only when reactive properties inside them change. In this case, we have a <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">Date</span></kbd> that is not reactive and, thus, will not trigger any update.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
