<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>The name of the transition is the first word of the CSS class selectors <kbd>(<span class="epub__VerbatimChar">fade</span>)</kbd>, and Vue will look for them based on whether the element is appearing or disappearing from the screen. If no name is specified and only <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">&lt;transition&gt;</span></kbd> is used, Vue will use the transition name, <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">v</span></kbd> for CSS.</p>
<p>In our case, the dragon that was previously invisible is appearing and so, <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">fade-enter</span></kbd> will be applied for a tick (a tick is a cycle for refreshing the view, but you can think of it as a frame in an animation). This means the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">&lt;span&gt;</span></kbd> will be effectively invisible at the beginning because the opacity will be set to <kbd>0</kbd>.</p>
<p>After that, the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">fade-enter</span></kbd> class will be removed and <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">fade-enter-active</span></kbd>, which was attached to <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">fade-enter</span></kbd>, is now the only class remaining. The opacity will go to <kbd>1</kbd> in half a second as you can see from the rules of the class. Where is 1 specified? It's the default value.</p>
<p>The complete set of classes Vue will look for in transitions are as follows:</p>
<ul>
<li><kbd>name-enter</kbd>: This is the starting class for <kbd>enter</kbd>; it is applied before an element is inserted, and removed after one frame.</li>
<li><kbd>name-enter-active</kbd>: This is the persistent class for <kbd>enter</kbd>. It is applied before an element is inserted and is removed when the transition/animation finishes. Use this to define the features of the transition, such as duration and easing.</li>
<li><kbd>name-enter-to</kbd>: This is the ending class for <kbd>enter</kbd>. It is applied when <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">name-enter</span></kbd> is removed.</li>
<li><kbd>name-leave</kbd>: This is the starting class for <kbd>leave</kbd>. It is applied when <kbd>leave</kbd> transition is triggered and is removed after one frame.</li>
<li><kbd>name-leave-active</kbd>: This is the persistent class for <kbd>leave</kbd>. It is applied when <kbd>leave</kbd> transition is triggered and is removed when the transition/animation finishes.</li>
<li><kbd>name-leave-to</kbd>: This replaces <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">name-leave</span></kbd>.</li>
</ul>
<p>Here, <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">name</span> is the name of your transition (<kbd>v</kbd> where no name is specified).</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
