<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>There's more...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>There's more...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>Often, countries and cities are arranged in hierarchical ways. This means that we need two or more select elements to pin down a user birth place, for example. In this paragraph, we will explore a little bit of hierarchical selection with multiple drop-down menus. Since there are too many cities in the world, I will use a biological equivalent and we will select from animals:</p>
<pre>clans: { <br/>  mammalia: { <br/>    'have fingers': { <br/>      human: 'human', <br/>      chimpanzee: 'chimpanzee' <br/>    }, <br/>    'fingerless': { <br/>      cat: 'cat', <br/>      bear: 'bear' <br/>    } <br/>  }, <br/>  birds: { <br/>    flying: { <br/>      eagle: 'eagle', <br/>      pidgeon: 'pidgeon' <br/>    }, <br/>    'non flying': { <br/>      chicken: 'chicken' <br/>    } <br/>  } <br/>}
</pre>
<p>We will call the top level a <kbd>clan</kbd>, the second level a <kbd>type</kbd> and the last will be an animal. I know it's an unorthodox way of classifying animals, but it will work for this example.</p>
<p>Let's add the two variables that will hold the state to our Vue model:</p>
<pre>clan: undefined, <br/>type: undefined
</pre>
<p>We can now add the first <kbd>select</kbd> element:</p>
<pre>&lt;select v-model="clan"&gt; <br/>  &lt;option v-for="(types, clan) in clans"&gt;{{clan}}&lt;/option&gt; <br/>&lt;/select&gt;
</pre>
<p>This will create a drop-down menu with the following:</p>
<ul>
<li>Mammalia</li>
<li>Birds</li>
</ul>
<p>The variable <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">types</span> don't really do anything in this particular case.</p>
<p>We would like to populate a second drop-down with the <kbd>type</kbd> of a particular <kbd>clan</kbd>:</p>
<pre>&lt;select v-model="type"&gt; <br/>  &lt;option v-for="(species, type) in clans[clan]"&gt;{{type}}&lt;/option&gt; <br/>&lt;/select&gt;
</pre>
<p>When the variable <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">clan</span> has a value, this select element will let you choose the type of animal. Consider that we add a third select for the species though:</p>
<pre>&lt;select&gt; <br/>  &lt;option v-for="(animals, species) in clans[clan][type]"&gt;{{species}}&lt;/option&gt; <br/>&lt;/select&gt;
</pre>
<p>It will cause an error in our program because <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">clans[clan]</span></kbd> is undefined and Vue will try to evaluate it. To correct this, we may want the third select element to appear only when the first and the second have a value. For this, we can use the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">v-show</span></kbd> directive, but the problem is that Vue renders the elements with <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">v-show</span></kbd>, and only after rendering, will it hide them. This means that the error will still be thrown.</p>
<p>The right way is to use <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">v-if</span></kbd>, which prevents the rendering of the element if the condition inside is not satisfied is, as follows:</p>
<pre>&lt;select v-if="clans[clan]"&gt; <br/>  &lt;option v-for="(animals, species) in clans[clan][type]"&gt;{{species}}&lt;/option&gt; <br/>&lt;/select&gt;
</pre>
<p>Go ahead and choose your favorite animal hierarchically!</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
