<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>When we click on the button, the <span class="epub__VerbatimChar"><kbd>taxiCalled</kbd> variable </span>turns <kbd>true</kbd> and Vue inserts the taxi into your page. Before actually doing this, it reads the classes you specified in <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">enter-class</span></kbd> (in this case, only <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">slideInRight</span></kbd>) and applies it to the wrapped element (the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">&lt;p&gt;</span></kbd> element with the taxi emoji). It also applies the classes specified in <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">enter-class-active</span></kbd> (in this case, only <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">go</span>).</p>
<p>The classes in <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">enter-class</span></kbd> are removed after the first frame, and the classes in <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">enter-class-active</span></kbd> are also removed when the animation ends.</p>
<p>The animation created here follows the FLIP technique that is composed of four points:</p>
<ul>
<li><strong>First (F)</strong>: You take the property as it is in the first frame of your animation; in our case, we want the taxi to start somewhere from the right of the screen.</li>
<li><strong>Last (L)</strong>: You take the property as it is in the last frame of your animation, which is the taxi at the left of the screen in our case.</li>
<li><strong>Invert (I)</strong>: You invert the property change you registered between the first and last frame. Since our taxi moved to the left, at the final frame it will be at say -200 pixel offset. We invert that and set the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">slideInRight</span></kbd> class to have <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">transform as <kbd>translateX(200px)</kbd></span> so that the taxi will be at +200 pixel offset when it appears.</li>
<li><strong>Play (P)</strong>: We create a transition for every property we have touched. In the taxi example, we use the <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">transform</span> property and so, we use <kbd>write<span class="epub__VerbatimChar">transition: all 2s ease-out</span></kbd> to tween the taxi smoothly.</li>
</ul>
<p>This technique is used automatically by Vue under the cover to make transitions work inside the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">&lt;transition-group&gt;</span></kbd> tag. More on that in the <em>Adding entering and leaving transition for elements of a list</em> recipe.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
