<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>The <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">appear</span></kbd> directive in the <kbd>transition</kbd> tag will make the components appear for the first time with an associated transition (if it is found).</p>
<p>There are many possible ways to specify a transition on the first rendering of the component. In all cases, the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">appear</span></kbd> directive must be specified.</p>
<p>The first things Vue will look for when this directive is present are JavaScript hooks or CSS classes specified in the tag:</p>
<pre>&lt;transition <br/>  appear <br/>  @before-appear="customBeforeAppearHook" <br/>  @appear="customAppearHook" <br/>  @after-appear="customAfterAppearHook" <br/>  appear-class="custom-appear-class" <br/>  appear-active-class="custom-appear-active-class" <br/>&gt; <br/>  &lt;p&gt;My element&lt;/p&gt; <br/>&lt;/transition&gt;
</pre>
<p>After that, if a name is specified, Vue will look for an entrance transition for that element:</p>
<pre>&lt;transition appear name="myTransition"&gt; <br/>  &lt;p&gt;My element&lt;/p&gt; <br/>&lt;/transition&gt;
</pre>
<p>The preceding code will look for classes named as follows:</p>
<pre>.myTransition-enter {...} <br/>.myTransition-enter-active {...}
</pre>
<p>Vue will look for the default CSS classes for the element insertion (<kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">v-enter</span></kbd> and <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">v-enter-active</span></kbd>) if everything else fails. Incidentally, this is what we have done in our recipe.</p>
<div class="epub__packt_tip">Relying on these defaults is not a good practice; here, we have done it just as a demonstration. You should always give names to your transitions.</div>
<p>Maybe it's worth mentioning why we had to add the width and height to our image. The reason is that when we specify an image URL in our HTML, the browser doesn't know the size of the image in advance, so it doesn't reserve any space for it by default. Only by specifying the size of the image in advance, the browser is able to correctly compose the page even before an image is loaded.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
