<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>The general principle here is that you have a state for an element or component. When the state is numeric in nature, you can "tween" (from between) from one value to the other following a specific curve or acceleration.</p>
<p>Let's break down the code, shall we?</p>
<p>The first thing we do is to take the specified new height for the ball and save it to the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">newHeight</span></kbd> variable:</p>
<pre>const newHeight = Number(event.target.value)
</pre>
<p>In the next line, we are also saving our Vue instance in a <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">_this</span></kbd> helper variable:</p>
<pre>const _this = this
</pre>
<p>The reason we do so will be clear in a minute:</p>
<pre>const animate = (time) =&gt; { <br/>  requestAnimationFrame(animate) <br/>  TWEEN.update(time) <br/>}
</pre>
<p>In the preceding code, we are wrapping all of our animation in a function. This is idiomatic to the Tween.js library and identifies the main loop we will use to animate. If we have other tweens, this is the place to trigger them:</p>
<pre>new TWEEN.Tween({ H: this.height }) <br/>  .easing(TWEEN.Easing.Bounce.Out) <br/>  .to({ H: newHeight }, 1000) <br/>  .onUpdate(function () { <br/>    _this.height = this.H <br/>  }) <br/>.start()
</pre>
<p>This is the API call to our library. First, we are creating an object that will hold a copy of the height value in lieu of our component. Normally, here you put the object that represents the state itself. Due to Vue limitations (or Tween.js limitations), we are using a different strategy; we are animating a copy of the state and we are syncing the true state for every frame:</p>
<pre>Tween({ H: this.height })
</pre>
<p>The first line initializes this copy to be equal to the current actual height of the ball:</p>
<pre>easing(TWEEN.Easing.Bounce.Out)
</pre>
<p>We choose the easing to resemble a bouncy ball:</p>
<pre>.to({ H: newHeight }, 1000)
</pre>
<p>This line sets the target height and and the number of milliseconds the animation should last for:</p>
<pre>onUpdate(function () { <br/>  _this.height = this.H <br/>})
</pre>
<p>Here, we are copying the height of the animation back to the real thing. As this function binds <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">this</span> to the copied state, we are forced to use ES5 syntax to have access to it. This is why we had a variable ready to reference the Vue instance. Had we used the ES6 syntax, we would not have any way to get the value of <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">H</span></kbd> directly.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
