<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>The only tricky part in our code is building the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">&lt;puff&gt;</span></kbd> component. Once we have that in place, whatever we put inside will appear and disappear according to our transition. In our example, we used an already made transition. In the real world, we may craft a seriously complex animation that can be difficult to apply every time in the same manner. Having it packaged in a component is much easier and maintainable.</p>
<p>Two things make the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">&lt;puff&gt;</span></kbd> component work as a reusable transition:</p>
<pre>props: { <br/>  'enter-active-class': 'magictime puffIn', <br/>  'leave-active-class': 'magictime puffOut' <br/>}
</pre>
<p>Here, we specify the classes the component must adopt when entering and leaving; there is nothing too special here, we have already done it in the <em>Integrating with third-party CSS animation libraries such as animate.css</em> recipe.<br/>
At the end we return the actual element:</p>
<pre>return createElement('transition', data, context.children)
</pre>
<p>This line creates the root of our element that is a <kbd>&lt;transition&gt;</kbd> tag with only one child--<kbd>context.children</kbd>. This means that the child is unspecified; the component will put as child whatever actual child is passed in the template. In our examples, we passed some cards that were promptly displayed.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
