<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Introduction</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>Introduction</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>Vue is very appealing to designers because of its very close relationship with raw HTML and CSS. However, Vue is also attractive to frontend engineers because it has very sound engineering. The main characteristic of Vue architecture is how everything can be discretize as a component.</p>
<p>Having components all the way down makes your program, no matter how big, workable in isolated chunks. You can always add a new one without affecting others, and you can always throw away what you don't need, being sure that nothing will break.</p>
<p>Actually, this will be the ideal situation. The truth is that writing well isolated (loosely coupled) components is not always straightforward. There might be the case that two components are meant to work together or they have a specific way to communicate with each other.</p>
<p>If you follow the recipes in this chapter with attention and dedication, you will take mostly the good sides of components, and you will learn how to avoid some common pitfalls.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
