<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Kebab case and camel case</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>Kebab case and camel case</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>Kebab case is written like works are put in a shish-kebab--<kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">like-this-for-example</span></kbd>. Camel case uses capitalization instead of spaces--<kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">capitalizationLooksLikeThis</span></kbd>. Since HTML is case insensitive, it cannot use camel case. However, JavaScript is all about camel case; how do we make the two work together?</p>
<p>What Vue does is that it converts all the camel case into kebab case once it has to go in HTML. This is relevant to props because they are used in HTML.</p>
<p>Suppose, for a second, that our <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">level</span> variable is now called <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">soundLevel</span></kbd>:</p>
<pre>props: ['soundLevel']
</pre>
<p>Consider that you try to use it as is in the HTML:</p>
<pre>&lt;sound-icon :soundLevel="soundLevel"&gt;&lt;/sound-icon&gt;
</pre>
<p>It won't work because the variable is now called <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">sound-level</span></kbd> in the HTML:</p>
<pre>&lt;sound-icon :sound-level="soundLevel"&gt;&lt;/sound-icon&gt;
</pre>
<p>Always remember to refer to your variable by kebab case in your HTML if you used camel case in your JavaScript.</p>
<p>There is an exception to this rule though. If you are writing a template of a component and are using a string (like the one we used in the <kbd>sound-icon</kbd> component), you can actually use camel case in your HTML. This is because it will be picked up by Vue for interpretation rather than the browser. This also applies to components written with the <kbd>render</kbd> function since that is not even HTML.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
