<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>We have put an array with only one element--the string <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">level--</span>in the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">props</span></kbd> option. This is the property that our component will hold in its internal state.</p>
<p>You have to keep two things in mind when declaring props in your components:</p>
<ul>
<li>Props are one-way only communication</li>
<li>They can be <strong>fixed</strong> or <strong>dynamic</strong></li>
</ul>
<p>Props are specifically for communicating parent to child. In our example, the Vue instance told the sound icon what the sound level was. There was no way for the sound icon to reply to the instance.</p>
<p>Note the colon in front of our prop in the line:</p>
<pre>&lt;sound-icon :level="soundLevel"&gt;&lt;/sound-icon&gt;
</pre>
<p>Had we written <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">level="soundLevel"</span></kbd> without the initial colon, the meaning would have been different. No colon means "use this string for the value of the prop and never change it", so the value of <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">level</span> would have been fixed to <span class="epub__VerbatimChar"><kbd>soundLevel</kbd></span> when it should, in fact, be a dynamic number.</p>
<p>In our child component, we didn't use the usual syntax to declare the data. In child components, the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">data</span></kbd> option is a function. We have only one instance of a Vue, so an object will do the job. We can have multiple instances of children objects; so if we use an object, the same object will be shared among them. We want a different object for each child component, and the right way to achieve this is by calling a function at every instantiation--the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">data</span></kbd> function. If you try to assign an object, Vue will issue the following warning:</p>
<pre>[Vue warn]: The "data" option should be a function that returns a per-instance value in component definitions.
</pre>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
