<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How to do it...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How to do it...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>We will centralize the state of our whole application in a Vuex store. To install Vuex, you can add it as a dependency (more instructions at <span class="epub__URLPACKT">https://vuex.vuejs.org/en/installation.html</span>); for now, I will assume that you are working on JSFiddle or a single web page, in which you can add <span class="epub__URLPACKT">https://unpkg.com/vuex</span> as a dependency.</p>
<p>We declare a new store for our state, as follows:</p>
<pre>const store = new Vuex.Store({})
</pre>
<p>We then add properties to the empty object inside the parenthesis, just like we would do with a Vue instance.</p>
<p>First, we will tell Vuex to help us debug by noticing us every time we modify the state outside of a mutation:</p>
<pre>strict: true
</pre>
<p>Then, we will declare the state that we will use to characterize the whole system:</p>
<pre>state: { <br/>  currentActor: -1, <br/>  currentLine: -1, <br/>  actors: [], <br/>  dialogue: [ <br/>    'Where are you going?', <br/>    'To the cinema', <br/>    'What's on at the cinema?', <br/>    ''Quo vadis?'', <br/>    'Oh, what does it mean?' <br/>  ] <br/>}
</pre>
<p>We will fill in the actor array with objects that will represent the actors themselves. Moreover, we will access the <kbd>actor</kbd> and <kbd>dialogue</kbd> arrays in a circular manner.</p>
<p>The next things you have to write inside the Vuex store object are the mutations. Define one mutation that will add one actor to the scene and one mutation that will advance the current line by one:</p>
<pre>mutations: { <br/>  entersScene (state, uuid) { <br/>    state.currentLine =  <br/>      (state.currentLine + 1) % state.dialogue.length <br/>    state.actors.push({ <br/>      uuid, <br/>      line: state.dialogue[state.currentLine] <br/>    }) <br/>    state.currentActor =  <br/>      (state.currentActor + 1) % state.actors.length <br/>  }, <br/>  nextLine (state) { <br/>    state.currentActor =  <br/>      (state.currentActor + 1) % state.actors.length <br/>    state.currentLine =  <br/>      (state.currentLine + 1) % state.dialogue.length <br/>    state.actors[state.currentActor].line =  <br/>      state.dialogue[state.currentLine] <br/>  } <br/>}
</pre>
<p>You successfully completed the store. Now you need to define the component that will act in this comedy:</p>
<pre>Vue.component('blabber', { <br/>  template: '&lt;div class="blabber"&gt;{{currentLine}}&lt;/div&gt;', <br/>  data () { <br/>    return { <br/>      uuid: Math.random() <br/>    } <br/>  }, <br/>  computed: { <br/>    currentLine () { <br/>      return store.state.actors.find(actor =&gt; <br/>        actor.uuid === this.uuid).line <br/>    } <br/>  }, <br/>  created () { <br/>    store.commit('entersScene', this.uuid) <br/>  } <br/>})
</pre>
<p>The blabber component has a simple template (it just says its line). It retrieves its line from the store with a computed property and, at creation time, signals its entrance to the store.</p>
<p>You can put two blabbers in the HTML:</p>
<pre>&lt;div id="app"&gt; <br/>  &lt;blabber&gt;&lt;/blabber&gt; <br/>  &lt;blabber&gt;&lt;/blabber&gt; <br/>&lt;/div&gt;
</pre>
<p>Maybe add some style to frame your blabbers with some border through CSS:</p>
<pre>.blabber { <br/>  width: 200px; <br/>  height: 40px; <br/>  background-color: gainsboro; <br/>  border: 1px solid grey; <br/>}
</pre>
<p>The last thing you have to do to make all this machinery work is to commit the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">nextLine</span></kbd> mutation to the store every 2 seconds so that the show goes on. You can do it in the Vue instance by installing a <kbd>setInterval</kbd>:</p>
<pre>new Vue({ <br/>  el: '#app', <br/>  mounted () { <br/>    setInterval(() =&gt; { <br/>      store.commit('nextLine') <br/>    }, 2000) <br/>  } <br/>})
</pre>
<p>When you launch the application now, you will see the two blabbers talking in circle for hours.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
