<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>The blabbers always know their line because they communicate indirectly through the store.</p>
<p>If you look closely, the blabbers themselves have no state. Yeah they have a <strong>UUID</strong> (<strong>Universally Unique Identifier</strong>), but that is just to give them an identity, and it never really changes.</p>
<p>Their state is centralized in the store, and the <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">actor</span> array will look like this during execution:</p>
<pre>[{ <br/>  uuid:0.9775738039368538, <br/>  line:"'Quo vadis?'" <br/>}, <br/>{ <br/>  uuid:0.7398549831424475, <br/>  line:"Oh, what does it mean?" <br/>}]
</pre>
<p>Thanks to Vue reactivity, the component is just a mirror of this state.</p>
<p>The communication, while indirectly, is done in the store. Every 2 seconds, a <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">nextLine</span></kbd> mutation is issued:</p>
<pre>nextLine (state) { <br/>    state.currentActor =  <br/>      (state.currentActor + 1) % state.actors.length <br/>    state.currentLine =  <br/>      (state.currentLine + 1) % state.dialogue.length <br/>    state.actors[state.currentActor].line =  <br/>      state.dialogue[state.currentLine] <br/>  }
</pre>
<p>This advances the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">currentActor</span></kbd> and the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">currentLine</span></kbd>  indexes by one step; after that, the actor at the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">currentActor</span></kbd> index says the line at the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">currentLine</span></kbd> index. The actors don't communicate directly to each other, instead they just watch the result (<span class="epub__VerbatimChar">line</span>) of a shared counter (the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">currentLine</span></kbd>) that advances at every step.</p>
<p>More than components talking to each other, we created an orchestra director that will tell the components what to do.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
