<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>When using composition, there's a simple rule of thumb from the official docs that you have to keep in mind.</p>
<div class="epub__packt_tip">Everything in the parent template is compiled in parent scope; everything in the child template is compiled in child scope.</div>
<p>This means that you have to pay some attention to the variables you use in your templates, especially props.</p>
<p>Let's examine our <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">course</span> component more closely. We declared a prop called <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">menu</span></kbd> of the <kbd>Array</kbd> type, and we used it like this:</p>
<pre>&lt;div id="app"&gt; <br/>  &lt;course :menu="menu1"&gt;&lt;/course&gt; <br/>  &lt;course :menu="menu2"&gt;&lt;/course&gt; <br/>&lt;/div&gt;
</pre>
<p>In this context, we are writing the template of the Vue root instance. As a matter of fact, <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">menu1</span></kbd> and <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">menu2</span></kbd> are declared exactly there and we are able to use them without any problem.</p>
<p>Let's suppose that we have the following component:</p>
<pre>Vue.component('advertising', { <br/>  template: '&lt;div&gt;Buy our stuff!!!&lt;/div&gt;, <br/>  data () { <br/>    return { <br/>      show: false <br/>    } <br/>  } <br/>}
</pre>
<p>We want it to display only when the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">show</span></kbd> variable is <kbd>true.</kbd> We can think of writing something like this in our Vue instance template:</p>
<pre>&lt;advertising v-if="show"&gt;&lt;/advertising&gt;
</pre>
<p>No! This won't work because <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">show</span> is not in the scope of the Vue instance but in the scope of the <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">advertising</span> component.</p>
<p>In our recipe, we have the following hierarchy:</p>
<ol>
<li>The Vue instance, which contains the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">menu1</span></kbd> and <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">menu2</span></kbd> variables</li>
<li>The Course component, which uses the <kbd>menu</kbd> <kbd>prop</kbd> variable</li>
<li>The Dish component, which receives a single ham from the menu as prop</li>
</ol>
<p>So, the real data is only in one place--in the Vue instance. In general, it can also be external to the Vue instance; for example, it can be retrieved by an API. This is good because we can supply new data easily by acting only in one place. We passed the data through props, which makes where reactive variables are compiled clear.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
