<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>There’s more</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>There’s more</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>I want to close this recipe by telling you about <strong>component subclassing</strong>. To my knowledge, component subclassing is not officially supported; this doesn't mean it's impossible, of course.</p>
<p>I won't go in great detail, but I will give you a general direction to go in.</p>
<p>Write your base component, which will be a simple greeter:</p>
<pre>var Greeter = { <br/>  template: ` <br/>  &lt;p&gt; <br/>    {{message}} <br/>    &lt;button @click="greet"&gt;greet&lt;/button&gt; <br/>  &lt;/p&gt;`, <br/>  data () { <br/>    return { <br/>      message: '...' <br/>    } <br/>  }, <br/>  methods: { <br/>    greet () { <br/>      this.message = 'hello' <br/>    } <br/>  } <br/>}
</pre>
<p>It's just a simple string that will become <kbd>hello</kbd> when you press the <span class="epub__packt_screen">greet</span> button.</p>
<p>Have we really written the base component, or did we just write a mixin?</p>
<p>The subclassing is all in this ambivalence; we can use <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">Greeter</span></kbd> as a component and mixin because they are mostly made of the same things.</p>
<p>Put it in a subcomponent as a mixin:</p>
<pre>var SuperGreeter = { <br/>  mixins: [Greeter], <br/>  template: ` <br/>  &lt;p&gt; <br/>    {{message}} <br/>    &lt;button @click="superGreet"&gt;supergreet&lt;/button&gt; <br/>  &lt;/p&gt;`, <br/>  methods: { <br/>    superGreet () { <br/>      this.message = 'SUPER HELLO!' <br/>    } <br/>  } <br/>}
</pre>
<p>Put it in the main Vue instance as a component:</p>
<pre>new Vue({ <br/>  el: '#app', <br/>  components: { Greeter, SuperGreeter } <br/>})
</pre>
<p>Finally, you can add them both to the HTML:</p>
<pre>&lt;div id="app"&gt; <br/>  &lt;greeter&gt;&lt;/greeter&gt; <br/>  &lt;super-greeter&gt;&lt;/super-greeter&gt; <br/>&lt;/div&gt;
</pre>
<p>Now you have a component and a subcomponent in which you overwrote the template and added a method.</p>
<p>Note that the greet method is present in the subclass also, it is just not used. Maybe you can figure out a way to have polymorphism? It's an open problem even for me.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
