<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>When our application starts up, the <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">created</span> hook is engaged and will run the code with Axios. The first line performs a GET request to the API endpoint:</p>
<pre>axios.get('http://api.adviceslip.com/advice')
</pre>
<p>This will return a promise. We can use the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">then</span></kbd> method on any promise to act on the result if the promise resolves successfully:</p>
<pre>.then(response =&gt; { <br/>  this.advice = response.data.slip.advice <br/>})
</pre>
<p>The <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">response</span> object will contain some data about the result of our request. A possible response object is the following:</p>
<pre>{ <br/>  "data": { <br/>    "slip": { <br/>      "advice": "Repeat people's name when you meet them.", <br/>      "slip_id": "132" <br/>    } <br/>  }, <br/>  "status": 200, <br/>  "statusText": "OK", <br/>  "headers": { <br/>    "content-type": "text/html; charset=UTF-8", <br/>    "cache-control": "max-age=0, no-cache" <br/>  }, <br/>  "config": { <br/>    "transformRequest": {}, <br/>    "transformResponse": {}, <br/>    "timeout": 0, <br/>    "xsrfCookieName": "XSRF-TOKEN", <br/>    "xsrfHeaderName": "X-XSRF-TOKEN", <br/>    "maxContentLength": -1, <br/>    "headers": { <br/>      "Accept": "application/json, text/plain, */*" <br/>    }, <br/>    "method": "get", <br/>    "url": "http://api.adviceslip.com/advice" <br/>  }, <br/>  "request": {} <br/>}
</pre>
<p>We navigate to the property we want to interact with; in our case, we want <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">response.data.slip.advice</span></kbd>, which is the string. We copied the string in the variable advice in the instance state.</p>
<p>The last part is when something wrong happens to our request or to our code inside the first branch:</p>
<pre>.catch(error =&gt; { <br/>  this.advice = 'There was an error: ' + error.message <br/>})
</pre>
<p>We will explore error handling more in depth in the <em>Recovering from an error during a request</em> recipe. For now, let's trigger an error by hand, just to see what happens.</p>
<p>The cheapest way to trigger an error is to run the app on JSFiddle. Since the browser detects JSFiddle on a secure connection and our API is on HTTP (which is not secure), modern browsers will complain and will block the connection. You should see the following text:</p>
<pre>There was an error: Network Error
</pre>
<p>This is just one of the many possible errors you can experiment with. Consider that you edit the <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">GET</span> endpoint to some non-existent page:</p>
<pre>axios.get('http://api.adviceslip.com/non-existent-page')
</pre>
<p>In this case, you will get a 404 error:</p>
<pre>There was an error: Request failed with status code 404
</pre>
<p>Interestingly, you will end up in the error branch even if the request goes well but there is an error in the first branch.</p>
<p>Change the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">then</span></kbd> branch to this:</p>
<pre>.then(response =&gt; { <br/>  this.advice = undefined.hello <br/>})
</pre>
<p>As everybody knows, JavaScript cannot read "hello" property  of an undefined object:</p>
<pre>There was an error: Cannot read property 'hello' of undefined
</pre>
<p>It's just as I told you.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
