<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>Most of the magic happens in the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">submit</span></kbd> method. In the first line, we are creating an <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">XMLHttpRequest</span></kbd> object, which is a native JavaScript mechanism to make AJAX requests:</p>
<pre>const xhr = new XMLHttpRequest()
</pre>
<p>We then use the <kbd>open</kbd> and <kbd>setRequestHeader</kbd> methods to configure a new connection; we want to send a POST request, and we will send some JSON along with it:</p>
<pre>xhr.open('post', 'http://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts') <br/>xhr.setRequestHeader('Content-Type', 'application/json;charset=UTF-8')
</pre>
<p>Since we are interacting with a RESTful interface, the POST method means that we expect our request to modify data on the server (in particular, create a new post), and that issuing the same request more than one time will get different results every time (namely we will create a new, different post ID each time).</p>
<p>This is different from the more common GET request that will not modify data on the server (except logs maybe) and this will always yield the same results (provided that data on the server does not change between requests).</p>
<p>For more details about REST, take a look at the <em>Creating a REST client (and server!)</em> recipe.</p>
<p>The following lines are all about the response:</p>
<pre>xhr.onreadystatechange = () =&gt; { <br/>  const DONE = 4 <br/>  const CREATED = 201 <br/>  if (xhr.readyState === DONE) { <br/>    if (xhr.status === CREATED) { <br/>      this.response = xhr.response <br/>    } else { <br/>      this.response = 'Error: ' + xhr.status <br/>    } <br/>  } <br/>}
</pre>
<p>This will install a handler whenever we get some kind of change in our object. If the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">readyState</span></kbd> is changed to <kbd>DONE</kbd> it means, that we have our response from the server. Next, we check the status code, which should be <kbd>201</kbd> to signal that a new resource (our new post) has been created. If that is the case, we set the variable we put in the mustaches to get a quick feedback. Otherwise, we put the error message we received in the same variable.</p>
<p>The last thing we need to do, after setting up the event handlers, is to actually send the request along with the data of our new post:</p>
<pre>xhr.send(JSON.stringify({ <br/>  title: this.title, <br/>  body: this.body, <br/>  userId: this.userId <br/>}))
</pre>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
