<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p><strong>REST</strong> means <strong>REpresentational State Transfer</strong>, as in you will transfer a representation of the state of some resource. In practice, we are using a set of <strong>verbs</strong> to transfer the representation of the state of our messages.</p>
<p>Using the HTTP protocol, we have at our disposal the following verbs:</p>
<table class="epub__MsoTableGrid">
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><strong>Verb</strong></td>
<td><strong>Properties</strong></td>
<td><strong>Description</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><kbd>GET</kbd></td>
<td>Idempotent, safe</td>
<td>Used to retrieve the representation of a resource</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><kbd>POST</kbd></td>
<td/>
<td>Used to upload a new resource</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><kbd>PUT</kbd></td>
<td>Idempotent</td>
<td>Used to upload an existing resource (to modify it)</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><kbd>DELETE</kbd></td>
<td>Idempotent</td>
<td>Used to delete a resource</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<p>Idempotent means that if we use the same verb twice, nothing will happen to the resource, and safe means that nothing will happen at all.</p>
<p>In our application, we use the GET verb only at the beginning during creation. When we see the list changing as a result of the other actions, it is only because we are mirroring the actions on the server on the frontend.</p>
<p>The POST verb is used to add a new message to the list. Note how it's not idempotent, as even with the same text in the sticky message, we nonetheless create a new message that differs in ID when pressing the <span class="epub__packt_screen">add</span> button.</p>
<p>Pressing the <span class="epub__packt_screen">edit</span> button triggers a PUT and the <span class="epub__packt_screen">Delete</span> button, well, you can imagine that it uses the DELETE verb.</p>
<p>Axios makes this very clear by naming the methods of its API with the verbs themselves.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
