<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How to do it...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How to do it...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>To make our app work, we will ask random words from the <span class="epub__URLPACKT">http://www.setgetgo.com/randomword/get.php endpoint</span>. Every time you point the browser at this address, you will get a random word.</p>
<p>The whole page will consist solely of an infinite list of words. Write the following HTML:</p>
<pre>&lt;div id="app"&gt; <br/>  &lt;p v-for="word in words"&gt;{{word}}&lt;/p&gt; <br/>&lt;/div&gt;
</pre>
<p>The list of <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">words</span> needs to grow as we scroll down. So we need two things: understanding when the user reaches the bottom of the page, and getting new words.</p>
<p>To know when the user has reached the bottom of the page, we add a method in our Vue instance:</p>
<pre>new Vue({ <br/>  el: '#app', <br/>  methods: { <br/>    bottomVisible () { <br/>      const visibleHeight = document.documentElement.clientHeight <br/>      const pageHeight = document.documentElement.scrollHeight <br/>      const scrolled = window.scrollY <br/>      const reachedBottom = visibleHeight + scrolled &gt;= pageHeight <br/>      return reachedBottom || pageHeight &lt; visibleHeight <br/>    } <br/>  } <br/>})
</pre>
<p>This will return <kbd>true</kbd> if either the page is scrolled until the bottom or the page itself is smaller than the browser.</p>
<p>Next, we need to add a mechanism to bind the result of this function to a state variable <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">bottom</span> and update it every time the user scrolls the page. We can do that in the <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">created</span> hook:</p>
<pre>created () { <br/>  window.addEventListener('scroll', () =&gt; { <br/>    this.bottom = this.bottomVisible() <br/>  }) <br/>}
</pre>
<p>The state will be composed of the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">bottom</span></kbd> variable and the list of random words:</p>
<pre>data: { <br/>  bottom: false, <br/>  words: [] <br/>}
</pre>
<p>We now need a method to add words to the array. Add the following method to the existing method:</p>
<pre>addWord () { <br/>  axios.get('http://www.setgetgo.com/randomword/get.php') <br/>    .then(response =&gt; { <br/>      this.words.push(response.data) <br/>      if (this.bottomVisible()) { <br/>        this.addWord() <br/>      } <br/>    }) <br/>}
</pre>
<p>The method will recursively call itself until the page has enough words to fill the whole browser view.</p>
<p>Since this method needs to be called every time we reach the bottom, we will watch for the <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">bottom</span> variable and fire the method if it's <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">true</span>.</kbd> Add the following option to the Vue instance just after the <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">data:</span></p>
<pre>watch: { <br/>  bottom (bottom) { <br/>    if (bottom) { <br/>      this.addWord() <br/>    } <br/>  } <br/>}
</pre>
<p>We also need to call the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">addWord</span></kbd> method in the created hook to kick-start the page:</p>
<pre>created () { <br/>  window.addEventListener('scroll', () =&gt; { <br/>    this.bottom = this.bottomVisible() <br/>  }) <br/><strong>  this.addWord()</strong> <br/>}
</pre>
<p>If you launch the page now, you will have an infinite stream of random words, which is useful when you need to create a new password!</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
