<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>To prevent XSS attacks, you must ensure that no user input can appear as code in your app. This means you must be very careful about using the <kbd>v-html</kbd> attribute (the <em>Output raw HTML</em> recipe).</p>
<p>Unfortunately, you can't control what happens outside your page. If one of your users receives a fake e-mail that contains a link that corresponds to an action in your application, clicking on the link in the e-mail will trigger the action.</p>
<p>Let's make a concrete example; you developed a bank app, <em>VueBank</em>, and a user of your app receives the following fake e-mail:</p>
<pre>Hello user!<br/>Click here to read the latest news.
</pre>
<p>As you can see, the mail is not even about our application and the <kbd>here</kbd> hyperlink is hidden in the HTML of the mail itself. In reality, it points to the <kbd><span class="epub__URLPACKT">http://vuebank.com?give_all_my_money_to_account=754839534</span></kbd> address.</p>
<p>If we are logged in to VueBank, the link may work right away. It does not look good for our finances.</p>
<p>To prevent these kinds of attacks, we should have our backend generate a <strong>CSRF</strong> (<strong>Cross Site Request Forgery</strong>) token for us. We will take the token and send it along the request to prove that the request originated from the user. The preceding link will become</p>
<p><kbd><span class="epub__URLPACKT">http://vuebank.com?give_all_my_money_to_account=754839534&amp;csrf=s83Rnj</span></kbd>.</p>
<p>Since the token is generated randomly every time, the link in the mail cannot be forged correctly because the attacker does not know the token that the server gave to the web page.</p>
<p>In Vue, we use Axios to send the token. Usually, we won't send it as part of the link, but in a header of the request; in fact, Axios does this for us and puts in the token in the next request automatically.</p>
<p>You can change the name of the cookie that Axios will pick up by setting the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">axios.defaults.xsrfCookieName</span></kbd> variable, and you can edit the name of the header that will return the token acting on the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">axios.defaults.xsrfHeaderName</span></kbd> variable.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
