<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>There's more…</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>There's more…</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>The astute reader will certainly find what can be interpreted as a bug--we added a couple of CSS styles before running the application. The <span class="epub__VerbatimChar"><kbd>.router-link-active</kbd> class</span> is automatically injected in the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">&lt;router-link&gt;</span></kbd> component whenever the page corresponds to the link actually pointed to.</p>
<p>When we click on <span class="epub__packt_screen">Menu</span> and <span class="epub__packt_screen">Bar</span>, the background color changes but it seems that it remains stuck to be selected for the <span class="epub__packt_screen">Home</span> link. This is because the matching performed by the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">&lt;router-link&gt;</span></kbd> component is not <strong>exact</strong>. In other words, <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">/bar</span></kbd> and <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">/menu</span></kbd> contain the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">/</span></kbd> string and, for this reason, <kbd>/</kbd> is always matched.</p>
<p>A quick fix for this is to add the attribute <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">exactly the same as</span> the first <span class="epub__VerbatimChar"><kbd>&lt;router-link&gt;</kbd>:</span></p>
<pre>&lt;li&gt;&lt;router-link to="/" <strong>exact</strong>&gt;Home&lt;/router-link&gt;&lt;/li&gt;
</pre>
<p>Now, the <kbd>Home</kbd> link is highlighted only when the route exactly matches the home page link.</p>
<p>Another thing to note is the rule itself:</p>
<pre>a.router-link-active, li.router-link-active&gt;a {<br/>  background-color: gainsboro;<br/>}
</pre>
<p>Why do we match two different things? It depends on how you wrote the router link.</p>
<pre>&lt;li&gt;&lt;router-link to="/" exact&gt;Home&lt;/router-link&gt;&lt;/li&gt;
</pre>
<p>The preceding code will be translated in the following DOM portion:</p>
<pre>&lt;li&gt;&lt;a href="#/" <strong>class="router-link-active"</strong><strong>&gt;</strong>Home&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/li&gt;
</pre>
<p>While:</p>
<pre>&lt;router-link tag="li" to="/" exact&gt;Home&lt;/router-link&gt;
</pre>
<p>Becomes:</p>
<pre>&lt;li <strong>class="router-link-active"</strong>&gt;Home&lt;/li&gt;
</pre>
<p>Note how in the first case, the class is applied to the child anchor element; in the second case, it is applied to the parent element.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
