<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works…</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works…</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>The <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">beforeRouteEnter</span></kbd> hook takes three parameters:</p>
<ul>
<li><kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">to</span></kbd>: This is a <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">Route</span></kbd> object that represents the route requested by the user.</li>
<li><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">from:</span> This is also a <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">Route</span> object that represents the current route. This is the route the user will be kept at in case of errors.</li>
<li><kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">next</span></kbd>: This is a function we can use when we are ready to go on with the switching of the route. Calling this function with <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">false</span> will prevent the route from being changed, and it is useful in case of errors.</li>
</ul>
<p>When the preceding functions are called, we made a call with Axios to a web service that provided a string for a name and a string for a phone number.</p>
<p>When we are inside this hook, it's important to remember that we don't have access to <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">this</span>. It's because this hook runs before the component is actually instantiated, so there is no <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">this</span></kbd> to refer to.</p>
<p>When the server responds, we are inside the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">then</span></kbd> function and want to assign the name and phone returned from the server but, as said, we don't have access to <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">this</span>. The <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">next</span> function receives a reference to our component as an argument. We use this to set the variables to the received value:</p>
<pre>...<br/>}).then(response =&gt; {<br/>  next(vm =&gt; {<br/>    vm.name = response.data.name<br/>    vm.phone = response.data.phone<br/>  })<br/>})
</pre>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
