<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How to do it…</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How to do it…</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>In this recipe, we will build a website for a restaurant for ghosts. It won't be much different from the website of a regular restaurant, except for the requirements that the pages must fade instead of appearing instantly.</p>
<p>Let's put down some HTML layout, shall we:</p>
<pre>&lt;div id="app"&gt;<br/>  &lt;h1&gt;Ghost's Restaurant&lt;/h1&gt;<br/>  &lt;ul&gt;<br/>    &lt;li&gt;&lt;router-link to="/"&gt;Home&lt;/router-link&gt;&lt;/li&gt;<br/>    &lt;li&gt;&lt;router-link to="/menu"&gt;Menu&lt;/router-link&gt;&lt;/li&gt;  <br/>  &lt;/ul&gt;<br/>  &lt;transition mode="out-in"&gt;<br/>  &lt;router-view&gt;&lt;/router-view&gt;<br/>  &lt;/transition&gt;<br/>&lt;/div&gt;
</pre>
<p>Note how we wrapped the main router display port with a <kbd>transition</kbd> tag. The mode <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">out-in</span></kbd> is set because we want the animation for the disappearing component to finish before the other component appears. If we hadn't we set that, the two fading components would be stacked for a brief time. For a more detailed discussion, you can refer to the <em>Letting an element leave before the enter phase in a transition</em> recipe.</p>
<p>Let's create the two pages/components:</p>
<pre>const Home = { template: '&lt;div&gt;Welcome to Ghost's&lt;/div&gt;' }<br/>const Menu = { template: '&lt;div&gt;Today: invisible cookies&lt;/div&gt;' }
</pre>
<p>Now, let's register <kbd>routes</kbd>:</p>
<pre>Vue.use(VueRouter)<br/>const router = new VueRouter({<br/>  routes: [<br/>    { path: '/', component: Home },<br/>    { path: '/menu', component: Menu }<br/>  ]<br/>})
</pre>
<p>Before launching the application, instantiate a <kbd>Vue</kbd> object:</p>
<pre>new Vue({<br/>  router,<br/>  el: '#app'<br/>})
</pre>
<p>For the transition to work, you have to add a few CSS rules:</p>
<pre>.v-enter-active, .v-leave-active {<br/>  transition: opacity .5s;<br/>}<br/>.v-enter, .v-leave-active {<br/>  opacity: 0<br/>}
</pre>
<p>Launch your application now. You successfully added a fade transition between page changes.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
