<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works…</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works…</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>This recipe also demonstrates that it is not at all difficult to leverage external libraries, provided they are easy to install.</p>
<p>Since the <kbd>NProgress</kbd> component is so simple and useful, I report its API as a reference here:</p>
<ul>
<li><kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">NProgress.start()</span></kbd>: Shows the progress bar</li>
<li><kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">NProgress.set(0.4)</span></kbd>: Sets a percentage of the progress bar</li>
<li><kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">NProgress.inc()</span></kbd>: Increments the progress bar by a little</li>
<li><kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">NProgress.done()</span></kbd>: Completes the progress</li>
</ul>
<p>We have used two of the preceding functions.</p>
<p>As a precaution, I would also suggest not relying on the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">done()</span></kbd> function being called by the individual components. We are calling it in the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">then</span></kbd> function, but what if the next developer forgets? After all, we are starting the progress bar before <em>any</em> switch in route.</p>
<p>It would be better to add a new hook to the <kbd>router</kbd>:</p>
<pre>router.afterEach((to, from) =&gt; {<br/>  NProgress.done()<br/>})
</pre>
<p>Since the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">done</span></kbd> function is idempotent, we can call it as many times as we want. This will, therefore, not modify the behavior of our application and will ensure that even if future developers forget to close the progress bar, it will disappear by itself once the route has changed.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
