<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How to do it…</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How to do it…</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>Suppose that we have an online clothing shop.</p>
<p>This will be the HTML layout of the site:</p>
<pre>&lt;div id="app"&gt;<br/>  &lt;h1&gt;Clothes for Humans&lt;/h1&gt;<br/>  &lt;ul&gt;<br/>    &lt;li&gt;&lt;router-link to="/"&gt;Home&lt;/router-link&gt;&lt;/li&gt;<br/>    &lt;li&gt;&lt;router-link to="/clothes"&gt;Clothes&lt;/router-link&gt;&lt;/li&gt;<br/>  &lt;/ul&gt;<br/>  &lt;router-view&gt;&lt;/router-view&gt;<br/>&lt;/div&gt;
</pre>
<p>It's just a page with a link to a clothes listing.</p>
<p>Let's register the <kbd>VueRouter</kbd>:</p>
<pre>Vue.use(VueRouter)
</pre>
<p>We have three pages in our website, represented by the following components:</p>
<pre>const Home = { template: '&lt;div&gt;Welcome to Clothes for Humans&lt;/div&gt;' }<br/>const Clothes = { template: '&lt;div&gt;Today we have shoes&lt;/div&gt;' }<br/>const Sales = { template: '&lt;div&gt;Up to 50% discounts! Buy!&lt;/div&gt;' }
</pre>
<p>They represent the home page, the clothes listing, and a page we used last year with some discounts.</p>
<p>Let's register some <kbd>routes</kbd>:</p>
<pre>const router = new VueRouter({<br/>  routes: [<br/>    { path: '/', component: Home }<br/>    { path: '/clothes', component: Clothes },<br/>    { path: '/last-year-sales', component: Sales }<br/>  ]<br/>})
</pre>
<p>Finally, we add a root <kbd>Vue</kbd> instance:</p>
<pre>new Vue({<br/>  router,<br/>  el: '#app'<br/>})
</pre>
<p>You can launch the application, and it should work without any problems.</p>
<p>Black Friday is tomorrow and we forgot that it's the biggest event in fashion around the world. We don't have time to rewrite the home page, but there's that page from last year's sales that can do the trick. What we will do is redirect users who visit our home page to that page.</p>
<p>To implement this, we need to modify how we registered our <kbd>routes</kbd>:</p>
<pre>const router = new VueRouter({<br/>  routes: [<br/>    { path: '/', component: Home, <strong>redirect: '/last-year-sales'</strong> },<br/>    { path: '/clothes', component: Clothes },<br/>    { path: '/last-year-sales', component: Sales }<br/>  ]<br/>})
</pre>
<p>Only by adding that redirect we did save the day. Now, you will be presented with the sales page whenever you visit the home page.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
