<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works…</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works…</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>When you use a URL that contains the hash symbol in the browser, the browser will send a request for the URL without the suffix after the hash, that is, when you have an event inside a page that goes to the same page but with a different hash suffix:</p>
<pre><span class="epub__URLPACKT">http://example.com#/page1</span> on  <span class="epub__URLPACKT">http://example.com#/page2</span>
</pre>
<p>The browser will not reload the page; this is why vue-router can modify the content of the page when the user clicks on a link that only modifies the hash, without the page being reloaded.</p>
<p>When you change the mode from <kbd>hash</kbd> to <kbd>history</kbd>, vue-router will drop the hash notation and will leverage the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">history.pushState()</span></kbd> function.</p>
<p>This function adds another virtual page and changes the URL to something else:</p>
<pre><span class="epub__URLPACKT">http://example.com/page1</span> =pushState=&gt; <span class="epub__URLPACKT">http://example.com/page2</span>
</pre>
<p>The browser will not send a <kbd>GET</kbd> request to look for <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">page2</span></kbd> though; in fact, it won't do anything.</p>
<p>When you press the back button, the browser reverts the URL and vue-router receives an event. It will then read the URL (which is now <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">page1</span>)</kbd> and match the associated route.</p>
<p>The role of our compact <span class="epub__VerbatimChar">history server</span> is to redirect every GET request to the <kbd><span class="epub__VerbatimChar">index.html</span></kbd> page. This is why when we try to go to <kbd><span class="epub__URLPACKT">http://localhost:8080/fashion</span></kbd> directly, we don't get a <em>404</em> error.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
