<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>You wrote your very first unit test for a Vue application. If you write unit tests already, everything should be quite clear since we have not used any feature unique to Vue to write the test.</p>
<p>In any case, let's spend a little time analyzing the code we have written; after that, I'll provide some considerations about when you should write similar tests when writing a real application.</p>
<p>The test we wrote displays <kbd>my app should say Hello World</kbd> when you read it as a sentence on the web page.</p>
<p>This is a fairly generic message; however, let's look at the code closely:</p>
<pre>expect(document.querySelector('p').innerText)<br/>  .toContain('Hello World')
</pre>
<p>Read it as an English phrase--we expect the <kbd>&lt;p&gt;</kbd> element inside the document to contain the text <kbd>Hello World</kbd>.</p>
<p>The <kbd>document.querySelector('p')</kbd> code selects the first <kbd>p</kbd> element inside the page, to be precise. <kbd>innerText</kbd> looks inside the HTML element and returns the readable text that's inside. We then verify that this text contains <kbd>Hello World</kbd>.</p>
<p>In a real application, you wouldn't write the tests just under your web pages. Tests are of great importance to a developer to check whether everything is working correctly without manually verifying every single feature after every code change. On the other hand, you don't want your users to see the results of your tests.</p>
<p>In general, you will have a dedicated page, accessible only by developers, that runs all the tests for you.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
