<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>After your recipe is complete, you should note the general structure of your application. You have the application itself in <kbd>myApp.js</kbd>, and then you have your tests in <kbd>test.js</kbd>. You have some configuration files, such as <kbd>karma.conf.js</kbd> and <kbd>package.json</kbd>, and you have your libraries inside the <kbd>node_modules</kbd> directory. All these files work together to make your application testable.</p>
<p>In a real application, you will probably have more files for the source code and for the test, while the configuration files usually grow much slower.</p>
<p>In this whole setup, you may be wondering how you launch the application itself. After all, there is no HTML and the only thing we launched are tests; we've never seen this <kbd>Hello World</kbd> program.</p>
<p>Actually, you are right; there is no program to launch here. As a matter of fact, we had to write a fixture for the HTML layout inside the <kbd>beforeEach</kbd> of the tests:</p>
<pre>beforeEach(() =&gt; {<br/>  document.body.innerHTML = `<br/>    &lt;div id="app"&gt;&lt;/div&gt;<br/>  `<br/>  new Vue(window.myApp)<br/>    .$mount('#app')<br/>})
</pre>
<p>In the preceding code, we are injecting the HTML, which consists only of a <kbd>&lt;div&gt;</kbd> element (the rest of the layout is inside <kbd>myApp.js</kbd>) in the page.</p>
<p>We then create a new Vue instance, passing the option object contained in the <kbd>myApp</kbd> variable that was defined in <kbd>myApp.js</kbd>; we then use the <kbd>$mount('#app')</kbd> Vue API that effectively materializes the application in the <kbd>&lt;div&gt;</kbd> element we just injected.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
