<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How to do it...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How to do it...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>The test we will write is an illustration of how Vue's update mechanism works. From there, you will then be able to write asynchronous tests on your own.</p>
<p>In the <kbd>beforeEach</kbd> function of our test suite, write the following Vue instance:</p>
<pre>describe('my app', () =&gt; {<br/>  let vm<br/>  beforeEach(() =&gt; {<br/>    vm = new Vue({<br/>      template: `<br/>        &lt;div&gt;<br/>          &lt;input id="name" v-model="name"&gt;<br/>          &lt;p&gt;Hello from <br/>            &lt;span id="output"&gt;{{name}}&lt;/span&gt;<br/>          &lt;/p&gt;<br/>        &lt;/div&gt;<br/>      `,<br/>      data: {<br/>        name: undefined<br/>      }<br/>    }).$mount()<br/>  })<br/>})
</pre>
<p>This will create a component with a text box and a span element that will contain the <kbd>Hello from ...</kbd> phrase and whatever is written in the text box.</p>
<p>What we will do to test this component is write <kbd>Herman</kbd> in the text box (programmatically, not manually), and then wait for the DOM to update. When the DOM has updated, we check whether the <kbd>Hello from Herman</kbd> phrase appears.</p>
<p>Let's start with an empty test just after the <kbd>beforeEach</kbd> function:</p>
<pre>it('should display Hello from Herman after Herman is typed in the text-box', done =&gt; {<br/>  done()<br/>})
</pre>
<p>The preceding test passes already. Note that we are taking the done argument and then we are calling it as a function. The test will not pass until <kbd>done()</kbd> is called.</p>
<p>Assign the <kbd>&lt;span&gt;</kbd> element to a variable for convenience and then insert the text <kbd>Herman</kbd> in to the text box:</p>
<pre>it('should display Hello from Herman after Herman is typed in the text-box', done =&gt; {<br/><strong>  const outputEl = vm.$el.querySelector('#output')</strong><br/><strong>  vm.$el.querySelector('#name').value = 'Herman'</strong><br/>  done()<br/>})
</pre>
<p>While we have to wait for the DOM to update when we modify the state, the opposite is not true; when we have modified the DOM, we can already check whether the <kbd>name</kbd> variable has changed:</p>
<pre>it('should display Hello from Herman after Herman is typed in the text-box', done =&gt; {<br/>  const outputEl = vm.$el.querySelector('#output')<br/>  vm.$el.querySelector('#name').value = 'Herman'<br/><strong>  expect(vm.name = 'Herman')</strong><br/>  done()<br/>})
</pre>
<p>Launch the test while you edit it to check whether it works.</p>
<p>Next, we will install a listener for the next update cycle of the <kbd>Vue</kbd> component, called a tick:</p>
<pre>it('should display Hello from Herman after Herman is typed in the text-box', done =&gt; {<br/>  const outputEl = vm.$el.querySelector('#output')<br/>  vm.$el.querySelector('#name').value = 'Herman'<br/>  expect(vm.name = 'Herman')<br/><strong>  vm.$nextTick(() =&gt; {</strong><br/>    done()<br/><strong>  })</strong><br/>})
</pre>
<p>Everything inside the <kbd>$nextTick</kbd> block is run only after the DOM is updated. We will check that the content of the <kbd>&lt;span&gt;</kbd> element has changed:</p>
<pre>it('should display Hello from Herman after Herman is typed in the text-box', done =&gt; {<br/>  const outputEl = vm.$el.querySelector('#output')<br/>  vm.$el.querySelector('#name').value = 'Herman'<br/><strong>  expect(outputEl.textContent).not.toContain('Herman')</strong><br/>  expect(vm.name = 'Herman')<br/>  vm.$nextTick(() =&gt; {<br/><strong>    expect(outputEl.textContent).toContain('Herman')</strong><br/>    done()<br/>  })<br/>})
</pre>
<p>Note how we also verify that the DOM is unchanged before the tick.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
