<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>Chai is a simple library that implements some functions and throws exceptions when some conditions are not satisfied. Mocha, on the other hand, runs certain bits of code, collects the exceptions, and tries to display them to the user in a nice way.</p>
<p>While it's largely a matter of taste as to what style to use, there are some subtle differences between the three styles.</p>
<ul>
<li><kbd>Should</kbd> has the added value of being more eloquent and readable. Unfortunately, it extends <kbd>Object</kbd>, adding the <kbd>should</kbd> function to everything. You shouldn't mind if you don't know how to react to the last phrase, but the correct way to behave is run and scream in pain; never extend <kbd>Object</kbd>.</li>
<li><kbd>Assert</kbd> means writing a detailed description of every assertion, and this is usually good if you write multiple assertions for each test. Personally, I consider it a good practice to write at most one assertion per test and concentrate on the title for description.</li>
<li><kbd>Expect</kbd> does not extend <kbd>Object</kbd> and is very readable with a good balance, and normally I prefer to use it over the other alternatives.</li>
</ul>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
