<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>The official Webpack template contains the configuration rule to never compile files inside the <kbd>node_modules</kbd> directory. This means that authors of web components are encouraged to distribute an already compiled file because otherwise users will import raw JavaScript files (since Webpack won't compile them) in their projects, causing all sorts of errors in browsers. Personally, I don't think this is good engineering. One problem with this setup is that since the files you are importing in your project are compiled against one version of Vue, the component might not work (this actually happened in the past) if you use a newer version of Vue.</p>
<p>A better approach is to import the raw files and components and let Webpack compile them in a single file. Unfortunately, the majority of components available in the wild are distributed already compiled, so while it's very quick to import them given the official template, you're more likely to encounter compatibility problems.</p>
<p>When importing external components, the first thing to do is to examine their <kbd>package.json</kbd> file. Let's see what the <kbd>vue-bulma-modal</kbd> package contains in this file:</p>
<pre>{<br/>  "name": "vue-bulma-modal",<br/>  "version": "1.0.1",<br/>  "description": "Modal component for Vue Bulma",<br/><strong>  "main": "src/index.js",<br/></strong>  "peerDependencies": {<br/>    "bulma": "&gt;=0.2",<br/>    "vue": "&gt;=2"<br/>  },<br/>  ...<br/>  "author": "Fangdun Cai &lt;cfddream@gmail.com&gt;",<br/>  "license": "MIT"<br/>}
</pre>
<p>The file referred to by the <kbd>main</kbd> property is the file we are importing when we write the following line in JavaScript:</p>
<pre>import { CardModal } from 'vue-bulma-modal'
</pre>
<p>The <kbd>src/index.js</kbd> file, in turn, contains the following code:</p>
<pre>import Modal from './Modal'<br/>import BaseModal from './BaseModal'<br/>import CardModal from './CardModal'<br/>import ImageModal from './ImageModal'<br/><br/>export {<br/>  Modal,<br/>  BaseModal,<br/>  CardModal,<br/>  ImageModal<br/>}
</pre>
<p>This is not a compiled file; it's raw ES6 and we know it because <kbd>import</kbd> is not defined in regular JavaScript. That's why we need Webpack to compile this for us.</p>
<p>On the other hand, consider that we write the following:</p>
<pre>&lt;style lang="sass"&gt;<br/>@import '~bulma';<br/>&lt;/style&gt;
</pre>
<p>With the tilde sign (<kbd>~</kbd>), we tell Webpack to resolve the style like it was a module and so, what we are really importing is the file referred to by the main in the <kbd>package.json</kbd> of the <kbd>bulma</kbd> package, which, if we check, looks as follows:</p>
<pre>{<br/>  "name": "bulma",<br/>  "version": "0.3.1",<br/>  ...<br/><strong>  "main": "bulma.sass",</strong><br/>  ...<br/>}
</pre>
<p>Since we are importing a SASS with the SASS syntax, we need to specify in the Vue component that we are using <kbd>lang="sass"</kbd>.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
