<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How to do it...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How to do it...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>Create a new directory with an empty npm project. You can use the <kbd>npm init -y</kbd> command or, if you have Yarn installed, you can use <kbd>yarn init -y</kbd> inside the directory. This command will create a new <kbd>package.json</kbd> inside the directory. (Refer to the note in the <em>Developing with continuous feedback with hot reloading</em> recipe on Yarn.)</p>
<p>For this npm project, we will need a couple of dependencies other than Vue: Webpack, and Babel in the form of a loader for Webpack. Oh yes, we will need the <kbd>vue-loader</kbd> as well for Webpack. To install them, launch the following two commands:</p>
<pre><strong>npm install --save vue</strong><br/><strong>npm install --save-dev webpack babel-core babel-loader babel-preset-es2015 vue-loader vue-template-compiler</strong>
</pre>
<p>In the same directory, let's write a component that uses ES6 syntax; let's call it <kbd>myComp.vue</kbd>:</p>
<pre>&lt;template&gt;<br/>  &lt;div&gt;Hello&lt;/div&gt;<br/>&lt;/template&gt;<br/>&lt;script&gt;<br/>var double = n =&gt; n * 2<br/>export default {<br/>  beforeCreate () {<br/>    console.log([1,2,3].map(double))<br/>  }<br/>}<br/>&lt;/script&gt;
</pre>
<p>This component doesn't do much except print the <kbd>[2,4,6]</kbd> array to the console, but it does it with arrow syntax at the following line:</p>
<pre>var double = n =&gt; n * 2
</pre>
<p>This is not understood by some browsers and tools; we need to compile this component with Webpack, but we need to do it with the Babel loader.</p>
<p>Create a new <kbd>webpack.config.js</kbd> file and write the following inside it:</p>
<pre>module.exports = {<br/>  entry: 'babel-loader!vue-loader!./myComp.vue',<br/>  output: {<br/>    filename: 'bundle.js',<br/>    path: 'dist'<br/>  }<br/>}
</pre>
<p>This will tell Webpack to start compiling from our <kbd>myComp.vue</kbd> file, but before that, it will be processed by the <kbd>vue-loader</kbd> to turn it into a js file and then by the <kbd>babel-loader</kbd> to turn the arrow function into something simpler and more compatible.</p>
<p>We can achieve the same thing with a different and more standard configuration:</p>
<pre>module.exports = {<br/><strong>  entry: './myComp.vue',<br/></strong>  output: {<br/>    filename: 'bundle.js'<br/>  },<br/>  <strong>module: {<br/>    rules: [<br/>      {<br/>        test: /.vue$/,<br/>        use: 'vue-loader'<br/>      },<br/>      {<br/>        test: /.js$/,<br/>        use: 'babel-loader'<br/>      }<br/>    ]<br/>  }</strong><br/>}
</pre>
<p>This is a more general configuration and it says that whenever we encounter a file that ends with <kbd>.vue</kbd>, it should be parsed and processed with the <kbd>vue-loader</kbd> and <kbd>.js</kbd> files with the <kbd>babel-loader</kbd>.</p>
<p>To configure the Babel loader, there are a couple of options; we'll follow the recommended way. Create a file called <kbd>.babelrc</kbd> inside your project folder (note the initial point) and to specify that we want the <kbd>es2015</kbd> preset applied, we write the following code:</p>
<pre>{<br/>  "presets": ["es2015"]<br/>}
</pre>
<p>Lastly, I always like to add a new script to the <kbd>package.json</kbd> file to make launching commands easier. Add the following line at the end of the file (but before the last curly brace):</p>
<pre>"scripts": {<br/>  "build": "webpack"<br/>}
</pre>
<p>Then run <kbd>npm run build</kbd>. This creates a file inside the <kbd>dist</kbd> directory, named <kbd>bundle.js</kbd>; open it and search for a line that contains, for example, <kbd>double</kbd>. You should find something like this:</p>
<pre>...<br/>var double = function double(n) {<br/>  return n * 2;<br/>};<br/>...
</pre>
<p>This was our <kbd>var double = n =&gt; n * 2</kbd>, transformed from ES6 to <em>regular</em> JavaScript.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
