<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How to do it...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How to do it...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>In a new folder, create a new npm project (you can use <kbd>npm init -y</kbd> or <kbd>yarn init -y</kbd>).</p>
<p>Inside the folder, create a new directory named <kbd>src</kbd> and put a file inside it, called <kbd>MyComp.vue</kbd>. Let the file contain the following code:</p>
<pre>&lt;template&gt;<br/>  &lt;div&gt;<br/>    Hello {{name}}!<br/>  &lt;/div&gt;<br/>&lt;/template&gt;<br/>&lt;script&gt;<br/>export default {<br/>  data () {<br/>    return {<br/>      name: 'John',<br/>      name: 'Jane'<br/>    }<br/>  }<br/>}<br/>&lt;/script&gt;
</pre>
<p>We can already spot a problem--the <kbd>John</kbd> name property will be overwritten by the later property, <kbd>Jane</kbd>, with the same key. Let's pretend that we didn't notice this and put the component inside a web page. For this, we need another file, named <kbd>index.js</kbd>, in the <kbd>src</kbd> directory. Write the following code inside it:</p>
<pre>import Vue from 'vue'<br/>import MyComp from './MyComp.vue'<br/>new Vue({<br/>  el: '#app',<br/>  render: h =&gt; h(MyComp)<br/>})
</pre>
<p>In the root directory, place an <kbd>index.html</kbd> file with the following code:</p>
<pre>&lt;!DOCTYPE html&gt;<br/>&lt;html&gt;<br/>  &lt;head&gt;<br/>    &lt;title&gt;Hello&lt;/title&gt;<br/>  &lt;/head&gt;<br/>  &lt;body&gt;<br/>    &lt;div id="app"&gt;&lt;/div&gt;<br/>      &lt;script src="bundle.js"&gt;&lt;/script&gt;<br/>    &lt;/body&gt;<br/>&lt;/html&gt;
</pre>
<p>We now need a <kbd>webpack.config.js</kbd> file to tell Webpack how to compile our files; write the following inside it:</p>
<pre>module.exports = {<br/>  entry: './src/index.js',<br/>  module: {<br/>    rules: [<br/>      { <br/>        test: /.vue$/,<br/>        use: 'vue-loader'<br/>      }<br/>    ]<br/>  }<br/>}
</pre>
<p>This just tells Webpack to start compiling from the <kbd>index.js</kbd> file and, whenever it finds a <kbd>.vue</kbd> file, to turn it into JavaScript with the <kbd>vue-loader</kbd>. Beyond this, we want to scan all our files with a linter to ensure that we didn't make silly mistakes in our code.</p>
<p>Add the following loader to the <kbd>rules</kbd> array:</p>
<pre>{<br/>  test: /.(vue|js)$/,<br/>  use: 'eslint-loader',<br/>  enforce: 'pre'<br/>}
</pre>
<p>The <kbd>enforce: 'pre'</kbd> property will run this loader before the others, so it will apply to the code you wrote and not a transformation of it.</p>
<p>The last thing we need is to configure ESLint. Create a new file in the root directory named <kbd>.eslintrc.js</kbd>, and add the following inside it:</p>
<pre>module.exports = {<br/>  "extends": "eslint:recommended",<br/>  "parser": "babel-eslint",<br/>  plugins: [<br/>    'html'<br/>  ]<br/>}
</pre>
<p>We are saying a couple of things here. First is the set of rules we want to apply to our code; in other words, our set of rules (which is empty now) is extending the recommended set of rules. Second, we are using the <kbd>babel-eslint</kbd> parser instead of the default one. Finally, we are using the HTML ESLint plugin, which will help us to deal with the <kbd>.vue</kbd> files and will extract the JavaScript code in them.<br/>
We are now ready to launch our development machinery, but first we need to install the dependencies using the following command:</p>
<pre><strong>npm install --save vue</strong><br/><strong>npm install --save-dev babel-eslint eslint eslint-loader eslint-plugin-html vue-loader vue-template-compiler webpack webpack-dev-server</strong>
</pre>
<p>We can launch the Webpack dev server directly, but I highly suggest adding the following code to the <kbd>package.json</kbd> file:</p>
<pre>"scripts": {<br/>  "dev": "webpack-dev-server --entry ./src/index.js --inline --hot --open"<br/>}
</pre>
<p>Now, if we launch <kbd>npm run dev</kbd>, a browser should open with the component incorrectly displaying the following:</p>
<p><kbd><q>Hello Jane!</q></kbd></p>
<p>You should also be able to see the problem in the console:</p>
<p><kbd>11:7  error  Duplicate key 'name'  no-dupe-keys</kbd></p>
<p>This means that we have two keys with the same <em>name</em>. Correct the error by removing the property:</p>
<pre>data () {<br/>  return {<br/>    name: 'John'<br/>  }<br/>}
</pre>
<p>In the console, after you save the Vue component, you should note that Webpack already performed the compilation again, this time with no errors.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
