<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How to do it…</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How to do it…</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>We'll start with a project with the official Webpack template. You can use your own, or you can spin up a new project with <kbd>vue init webpack</kbd> and install the dependencies with <kbd>npm isntall</kbd>.</p>
<p>Go inside the <kbd>build</kbd> directory. When you launch the <kbd>npm run build</kbd> command, you are effectively launching the <kbd>build.js</kbd> file in this directory.</p>
<p>If you examine the file, you will find something like this near the end:</p>
<pre>webpack(webpackConfig, function (err, stats) {<br/>...<br/>})
</pre>
<p>This is equivalent to launching Webpack from the command line using the same configuration specified in the first argument, <kbd>webpackConfig</kbd>. To have a minified and non-minified file, we have to bring the <kbd>webpackConfig</kbd> to a common denominator, then we will specify only the differences between the development and production versions of the files.</p>
<p>To do this, go inside <kbd>webpack.prod.conf.js</kbd> in the same directory. Here, you can see the configuration we are passing; in particular, you will find <kbd>UglifyJsPlugin</kbd>, which is responsible for minifying the file if you look at the plugin array. Remove the plugin since it represents the main difference between the two distributions.</p>
<p>Now, write the following in <kbd>build.js</kbd> before the Webpack command:</p>
<pre>const configs = [<br/>  {<br/>    plugins: [<br/>      new webpack.optimize.UglifyJsPlugin({<br/>        compress: {<br/>          warnings: false<br/>        },<br/>        sourceMap: true<br/>      })<br/>    ]<br/>  },<br/>  {<br/>    plugins: []<br/>  }<br/>]
</pre>
<p>You now have an array with two different configurations, one with the plugin required to minify the file and one without it. If you merge each of them with the configuration inside the <kbd>webpack.prod.conf.js</kbd>, you will obtain a different result.</p>
<p>To merge the two configurations, we will use the <kbd>webpack-merge</kbd> package. Add the following line to the top of the file:</p>
<pre>var merge = require('webpack-merge')
</pre>
<p>Then, modify the first line of the Webpack command to the following:</p>
<pre><strong>configs.</strong>map(<strong>c =&gt;</strong> webpack(<strong>merge(webpackConfig, c)</strong>, function (err, stats) {<br/>...
</pre>
<p>This will launch as many different merged configurations as we specify in the configs array. </p>
<p>You can launch the <kbd>npm run build</kbd> command now, but the problem is that the files will have the same name. Cut the output property from the <kbd>webpack.prod.conf.js</kbd> and paste it in the <kbd>config</kbd> array, which should now look like this:</p>
<pre>const configs = [<br/>  {<br/>    <strong>output: {</strong><br/><strong>      path: &lt;whatever is your path&gt;,</strong><br/><strong>      filename: 'myFilename.min.js'),</strong><br/><strong>      &lt;other options you may have&gt;</strong><br/><strong>    },</strong><br/>    plugins: [<br/>      new webpack.optimize.UglifyJsPlugin({<br/>        compress: {<br/>          warnings: false<br/>        }<br/>      })<br/>    ]<br/>  },<br/>  {<br/>    <strong>output: {</strong><br/><strong>      path: &lt;whatever is your path&gt;,</strong><br/><strong>      filename: 'myFilename.js'),</strong><br/><strong>      &lt;other options you may have&gt;</strong><br/><strong>    },</strong><br/>    plugins: []<br/>  }<br/>]
</pre>
<p>If you build your project now, you will have both a minified and a development file. You can, of course, personalize your configurations to grow very different. For example, you can add source maps in one and leave the other as is.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
