<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>The <kbd>vue-share-components</kbd> is simpler than the official template, so it's a good way to learn by examining it.</p>
<p>The first thing we can take a look at is the <kbd>package.json</kbd> file. The following lines are relevant:</p>
<pre>...<br/>"main": "dist/joke-button.common.js",<br/>"unpkg": "dist/joke-button.browser.js",<br/>"module": "index.js",<br/>"scripts": {<br/>  "dev": "cross-env NODE_ENV=development webpack --config config/webpack.config.dev.js --progress --watch",<br/>  "build": "npm run build:browser &amp;&amp; npm run build:common",<br/>  "build:browser": "cross-env NODE_ENV=production webpack --config config/webpack.config.browser.js --progress --hide-modules",<br/>  "build:common": "cross-env NODE_ENV=production webpack --config config/webpack.config.common.js --progress --hide-modules",<br/>  "prepublish": "npm run build"<br/>},<br/>...
</pre>
<p>The <kbd>main</kbd> property is what we actually get when we write the following command in our programs:</p>
<pre><strong>import JokeButton from 'JokeButton'</strong>
</pre>
<p>Alternatively, we get it when we add the following code:</p>
<pre>var JokeButton = require("JokeButton")
</pre>
<p>So, the <kbd>JokeButton</kbd> variable will actually contain what is exported in our <kbd>joke-button.common.js</kbd>.</p>
<div class="epub__packt_tip">You can edit the main property of <kbd>package.json</kbd> to point directly to a <kbd>.vue</kbd> component. This way, you give the user the responsibility to compile the component. While this is more work for the user, it also helps when one wants the freedom to compile against the most recent version of Vue.<br/>
In the latter case, if you have some logic of your component exported in <kbd>external.js</kbd> files (like in the first recipe of this chapter), always remember to add the directory in the Webpack rules, like so:<br/>
<kbd>{</kbd><br/>
<kbd>  test: /.js$/,</kbd><br/>
<kbd>  loader: 'babel-loader',</kbd><br/>
<kbd>  include: [resolve('src'), resolve('test'), resolve('node_modules/myComponent')]</kbd><br/>
<kbd>},</kbd></div>
<p>The unpkg is particular of unpkg.com, which is a CDN. This is very nice because as soon as we publish our project, we will have our script published at https://unpkg.com/joke-button, and it will point to the <span><kbd>joke-button.browser.js</kbd> file that is suited for the browser.</span></p>
<p>The <kbd>prepublish</kbd> script is a special script that will be called before publishing the project to npm with the <kbd>npm publish</kbd> command. This eliminates the possibility that you forget to build the files before publishing your component (it happened to me many times, so I was forced to increase the version of the software artificially, build the files manually, and publish again).</p>
<p>Another interesting fact to note is the difference between <kbd>webpack.config.common.js</kbd>, which outputs the <kbd><span>joke-button.common.js</span></kbd> file, and <kbd><span>webpack.config.browser.js</span></kbd>, which outputs the <kbd><span>joke-button.browser.js</span></kbd> file.</p>
<p>The first file has the output set to the following:</p>
<pre>output: {<br/>  path: './dist',<br/>  filename: outputFile + '.common.js',<br/>  libraryTarget: 'commonjs2',<br/>},<br/><span>target</span><span class="epub__pl-k">:</span><span> </span><span class="epub__pl-s"><span class="epub__pl-pds">'</span>node<span class="epub__pl-pds">'</span></span><span>,</span>
</pre>
<p>So, it will output a library that will expose a commonJS interface; this is tailored for non-browser environments, and you will have to require or import this library to use it. On the other hand, the second file for the browser has the following output:</p>
<pre>output: {<br/>  path: './dist',<br/>  filename: outputFile + '.browser.js',<br/>  library: globalName,<br/>  libraryTarget: 'umd',<br/>},
</pre>
<p>A UMD will expose itself in a global scope, no need to import anything, so it's perfect for the browser because we can include the file in a Vue webpage and use the component freely. This is also possible, thanks to the <kbd>index.js</kbd> auto-install feature:</p>
<pre>/* -- Plugin definition &amp; Auto-install -- */<br/>/* You shouldn't have to modify the code below */<br/>// Plugin<br/>const plugin = {<br/> /* eslint-disable no-undef */<br/> version: VERSION,<br/> install,<br/>}<br/>export default plugin<br/>// Auto-install<br/>let GlobalVue = null<br/>if (typeof window !== 'undefined') {<br/> GlobalVue = window.Vue<br/>} else if (typeof global !== 'undefined') {<br/> GlobalVue = global.Vue<br/>}<br/>if (GlobalVue) {<br/> GlobalVue.use(plugin)<br/>}
</pre>
<p>What this code is doing is packaging the install function (which registers the component(s) with Vue) inside the <kbd>plugin</kbd> constant and exporting it in the meantime. Then, it checks whether there is either <kbd>window</kbd> or <kbd>global</kbd> defined, in that case, it gets hold of the <kbd>Vue</kbd> variable that represents the Vue library and uses the plugin API to install the component(s).</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
