<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>The render function replaces the template in the <kbd>Vue</kbd> instance. When render is called, the passed argument is the so-called <kbd>createElement</kbd> function. We named it <kbd>h</kbd> for brevity. This function accepts three arguments, but for now, just note how the first argument we are passing (the only one we are passing) is the <kbd>Greeter</kbd> component.</p>
<div class="epub__packt_infobox">In theory, you can write the component inline, inside the <kbd>h</kbd> function. In a real project, this is not always possible depending on the presence of the Vue template compiler at runtime. When you use the official Webpack template, one of the questions you are asked is whether you want to include the Vue template compiler when distributing your software.</div>
<p>The arguments for the <kbd>createElement</kbd> function are listed here:</p>
<ol>
<li>As the first argument, the only required one, you have the option to pass three different things:
<ul>
<li>The options of a Vue component, like in our recipe</li>
<li>A string representing an HTML tag (such as <kbd>div</kbd>, <kbd>h1</kbd>, and <kbd>p</kbd>)</li>
<li>A function that returns an options object for a Vue component or a string representing an HTML tag</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>The second argument must be an object called <strong>Data Object</strong>. This object is explained in the next recipe.</li>
<li>The third argument is an array or a string:
<ul>
<li>The array represents a list of elements, text, or components to put inside the component</li>
<li>You can write a string that will be rendered to text</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ol>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
