<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>Vue lets you create components that are very lightweight as they don't have any internal state. With this come some limitations, for example, the only place where we can put some logic to process user input (in the form of children of the element or props) is in the render function.</p>
<p>The context we passed contains the following properties:</p>
<ul>
<li><kbd>props</kbd>: This is passed by the user.</li>
<li><kbd>children</kbd>: This is really an array of virtual nodes, children of our component in the template. We don't have the actual HTML element here but only a representation of it by Vue.</li>
<li><kbd>slots</kbd>: This is a function returning the slots (can be used instead of children in some cases).</li>
<li><kbd>data</kbd>: This is the entire data object passed to the component.</li>
<li><kbd>parent</kbd>: This is a reference to the parent component.</li>
</ul>
<p>In our code, we extracted the text inside the component by doing the following:</p>
<pre>context.children.map(c =&gt; {<br/>  return c.text<br/>    .replace(/moveTo/g, 'M')<br/>    .replace(/traceLine/g, 'L')<br/>    .replace(/closePath/g, 'z')<br/>}).join(' ').trim()
</pre>
<p>We are taking the array of virtual nodes contained in children and mapping each node to its text. Since we put only some text in our HTML, the array of nodes will be a singleton, with only one node: the text we entered. Therefore, in this particular case, doing <kbd>var a = children.map(c =&gt; someFunction(c))</kbd> is then equivalent of doing <kbd>var a = [someFunction(children[0])]</kbd>.</p>
<p>We are not only extracting the text though, we are replacing some terms I invented to describe <kbd>svg</kbd> commands, with the real commands. The <kbd>join</kbd> function will sew together all the strings in the array (just one in our case) and <kbd>trim</kbd> will remove all the white spaces and line breaks.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
