<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>I think it's important to note the names of the mutations; they are called <kbd>pushMessage</kbd> and <kbd>removeMessage</kbd>, but what they really do in this application is show the message in a stack on the screen and (fictionally) broadcast messages to users. Would it be better to call them <kbd>showMessage</kbd>, or <kbd>broadcastMessage</kbd> and <kbd>hideMessage</kbd>? No, that's because there has to be a clear separation of intent between the mutation itself and the particular effects of that mutation. The problem becomes clear when, for example, we decide to give users the ability to ignore these notifications or we introduce a delay before actually broadcasting the notifications. Then we will have a <kbd>showMessage</kbd> mutation that does not actually show a message.</p>
<p>The computed syntax we have used is as illustrated:</p>
<pre>computed: Vuex.mapState(['messages'])
</pre>
<div class="epub__packt_tip">You don't have to explicitly use Vuex in your expression when you are importing Vuex as an ES6 module. You just need to write<br/>
<kbd>import { mapState } from 'Vuex'</kbd>.<br/>
Then, the <kbd>mapState</kbd> function will be available.</div>
<p>The <kbd>mapState</kbd> method takes an array of strings as a parameter, looks for a <kbd>state</kbd> variable in the store with the same name as the string, and creates a computed property with the same name. You can do this with as many variables as you want.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
