<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>The <kbd>proxyTable</kbd> object will configure the <kbd>http-proxy-middleware</kbd>. This is useful every time we are developing the UI of a bigger web application and we launch our developer server on <kbd>localhost</kbd>, but our API responds to another web server. This is especially relevant when we want to use CORS and we don't allow other websites to use our API. The Xkcd API doesn't allow <kbd>localhost</kbd> to consume the web service. This is why, even if we try to use the Xkcd API directly, our browser won't let us. The <kbd>changeOrigin</kbd> option will send the request with Xkcd as host, making CORS unnecessary.</p>
<p>To call an action from a component, we used the <kbd>dispatch</kbd> function. It's also possible to pass the second argument, the first being the name of the action itself. The second argument is then passed when you define the action as the second parameter.</p>
<p>A last note on the naming--it being implicit that actions are asynchronous while mutations are synchronous, there is no need, in my opinion, to make the asynchronicity in the name of the actions explicit.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
