<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How to do it...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How to do it...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>You will build a clone of the popular Xkcd website. Actually, it will be a wrapper more than a real clone, since we will reuse the panels from the website.</p>
<p>Create a Vue project based on the Webpack template with <kbd>vue init webpack</kbd>. The first thing we will do is wire up the API to the Xkcd website in the <kbd>index.js</kbd> inside the <kbd>config</kbd> folder. Put the following lines inside the <kbd>proxyTable</kbd> object:</p>
<pre>module.exports = {<br/>  ...<br/>  dev: {<br/>    proxyTable: {<br/>      '/comic': {<br/>        target: 'https://xkcd.com',<br/>        changeOrigin: true,<br/>        pathRewrite: (path, req) =&gt; {<br/>          const num = path.split('/')[2]<br/>          return `/${num}/info.0.json`<br/>        }<br/>      }<br/>    },<br/>  ...
</pre>
<p>This will redirect all the requests we make to <kbd>/comic</kbd> to the Xkcd website.</p>
<p>Inside <kbd>src</kbd>, make a new <kbd>store</kbd> directory and an <kbd>index.js</kbd> inside it; here, start building the application store:</p>
<pre>import Vue from 'vue'<br/>import Vuex from 'vuex'<br/><br/>Vue.use(Vuex)<br/><br/>const store = new Vuex.Store({<br/>  state: {<br/>    currentPanel: undefined,<br/>    currentImg: undefined,<br/>    errorStack: []<br/>  },<br/>  actions: {},<br/>  mutations: {}<br/>}<br/><br/>export default store
</pre>
<p>You should import this inside <kbd>main.js</kbd> like in previous recipes. We want to trace the current panel number, the link to the panel image, and the possible errors. The only way to modify the state is through mutations, while actions can perform asynchronous work.</p>
<p>When the app is loaded, we plan to display the latest comic. For this, we create an action:</p>
<pre>actions: {<br/>  goToLastPanel ({ commit }) {<br/>    axios.get(endpoint)<br/>      .then(({ data }) =&gt; {<br/>        commit('setPanel', data.num)<br/>        commit('setImg', data.img)<br/>      }).catch(error =&gt; {<br/>        commit('pushError', error)<br/>      })<br/>  }<br/> ...
</pre>
<p>For this code to work, we need to declare the endpoint and install Axios:</p>
<pre>...<br/>import axios from 'axios'<br/>...<br/>const endpoint = '/comic/'
</pre>
<p>It should be easy for you to write the corresponding mutations:</p>
<pre>mutations: {<br/>  setPanel (state, num) {<br/>    state.currentPanel = num<br/>  },<br/>  setImg (state, img) {<br/>    state.currentImg = img<br/>  },<br/>  pushError (state, error) {<br/>    state.errorStack.push(error)<br/>  }<br/>}
</pre>
<p>We'll recycle the <kbd>Hello.vue</kbd> component and put the following template inside it:</p>
<pre>&lt;template&gt;<br/>  &lt;div class="hello"&gt;<br/>    &lt;h1&gt;XKCD&lt;/h1&gt;<br/>    &lt;img :src="currentImg"&gt;<br/>  &lt;/div&gt;<br/>&lt;/template&gt;
</pre>
<p>To make the last panel appear on loading you can use the following JavaScript in the component:</p>
<pre>&lt;script&gt;<br/>import { mapState } from 'vuex'<br/>export default {<br/>  name: 'hello',<br/>  computed: mapState(['currentImg']),<br/>  created () {<br/>    this.$store.dispatch('goToLastPanel')<br/>  }<br/>}<br/>&lt;/script&gt;
</pre>
<p>Also, you can delete most of the <kbd>App.vue</kbd> template and leave only the following:</p>
<pre>&lt;template&gt;<br/>  &lt;div id="app"&gt;<br/>    &lt;router-view&gt;&lt;/router-view&gt;<br/>  &lt;/div&gt;<br/>&lt;/template&gt;
</pre>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
