<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How to do it...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How to do it...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>Imagine that you are building a Bitcoin wallet. You want to give your users an overview of their balance, and you want them to see how many Euros it corresponds to.<br/>
<span>Create a new Webpack template with</span> <kbd>vue init webpack</kbd><span> and</span> <kbd>npm install vuex</kbd><span>. Create a new</span> <kbd>src/store/index.js</kbd> file<span> and write the following inside it:</span></p>
<pre>import Vue from 'vue'<br/>import Vuex from 'vuex'<br/><br/>Vue.use(Vuex)<br/><br/>const store = new Vuex.Store({<br/>  state: {<br/>    bitcoin: 600,<br/>    rate: 1000,<br/>    euro: 600000<br/>  }<br/>})<br/><br/>export default store
</pre>
<p>This code is prone to errors. The first error can be a miscalculation of the Euro amount if we don't get the multiplication right. The second kind of error can be that we tell the user the <kbd>bitcoin</kbd> and <kbd>euro</kbd> balance during a transaction, resulting in a stale and wrong amount for one of the two.</p>
<p>To tackle these issues, we use <kbd>getters</kbd>:</p>
<pre>const store = new Vuex.Store({<br/>  state: {<br/>    bitcoin: 600,<br/>    rate: 1000<br/>  },<br/>  getters: {<br/>    euro: state =&gt; state.bitcoin * state.rate<br/>  }<br/>})
</pre>
<p>This way the <kbd>euro</kbd> amount is never in the state but always computed. Moreover, it is centralized in the store, so we don't need to add anything to our components.</p>
<p>Now, it's easy to retrieve the two amounts from a template:</p>
<pre>&lt;template&gt;<br/>  &lt;div&gt;<br/>    &lt;h1&gt;Balance&lt;/h1&gt;<br/>    &lt;ul&gt;<br/>      &lt;li&gt;{{$store.state.bitcoin}}<span>฿</span>&lt;/li&gt;<br/>      &lt;li&gt;{{$store.getters.euro}}&amp;euro;&lt;/li&gt;<br/>    &lt;/ul&gt;<br/>  &lt;/div&gt;<br/>&lt;/template&gt;
</pre>
<p>Here, <kbd>&amp;#3647 ;</kbd> is the HTML entity for the Bitcoin symbol.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
