<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How it works...</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section>

            <header>
                <h1>How it works...</h1>
            </header>

            <article>
                
<p>While the testing of the mutations is pretty straightforward, I think the testing of the actions deserves some more explaining.</p>
<p>Since we didn't want to depend on external services for actions, we had to mock the <kbd>axios</kbd> service. We used the <kbd>inject-loader</kbd>, which takes the original library and mocks the parts we specify with arbitrary code (the <kbd>@</kbd> symbol is a shorthand for <kbd>src</kbd>); in our case, we mocked the <kbd>axios</kbd> library and, precisely, the <kbd>get</kbd> method. We had to use the CommonJS syntax (with the <kbd>require</kbd>) because that's the only way to tell Webpack to use loaders in imports.</p>
<p>What we have done in the test is that we also mocked the <kbd>commit</kbd> function. Normally, this function calls a mutation that modifies the state. We just want to know if the correct mutation is called and with the right arguments. Moreover, we had to wrap everything in a <kbd>try</kbd> block; without it, the test would fail over a timeout and we'd lose the error. Instead, now we fail immediately and we can read, from the console, what error caused the test to fail.</p>


            </article>

            <footer style="margin-top: 5em;">
                
            </footer>

        </section>


</body>
</html>
