<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 6. Make</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 

<h2>Chapter 6. Make</h2>



<p class="docText">The first build tool this book examines in detail is Make [40]. You’ve already seen a basic example of using Make in Chapter 2,
 “A Make-Based Build System,” and many developers are familiar with this
 popular tool. This chapter explores the syntax of Make-based build 
systems in more detail and presents a number of practical use cases.</p>

<p class="docText">Created in 1977, Make has 
revolutionized the way software is compiled. For many years, Make was 
the only build tool available; new tools created since that time (such 
as Ant, CMake, and SCons) introduced themselves as a “Make replacement.”
 There’s certainly no ignoring the valuable contribution Make has 
provided to the software industry.</p>

<p class="docText">Central to Make’s operation is the concept of a <span class="docEmphStrong">rule</span>,
 providing all the interfile dependency information needed to compile a 
program. A developer must specify the name of a target file to be 
compiled, as well as all the input files for the compilation. In 
addition, the rule contains one or more shell commands that generate the
 target file from the source files.</p>

<p class="docText">As an example, the following rule indicates that <tt>myprog</tt> is a generated file that is created by running the <tt>gcc</tt> command with the <tt>prog.c</tt> and <tt>lib.c</tt> files as input.</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre>myprog: prog.c lib.c
    gcc –o myprog prog.c lib.c</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">If either of the last-modified time stamps of <tt>prog.c</tt> and <tt>lib.c</tt> are more recent than the time stamp of <tt>myprog</tt>, Make assumes that the developer has modified the source files since <tt>myprog</tt> was last compiled. As a result, it reruns the <tt>gcc</tt> command to regenerate <tt>myprog</tt> from the latest source files.</p>

<p class="docText">The developer who writes a build description file (known as a <span class="docEmphStrong">makefile</span>)
 must carefully specify the dependencies among all files in the system, 
along with all the intermediate steps. In a large system with thousands 
of source files and a large array of file types (such as executable programs, data files, and object files), the number of rules can be extensive.</p>

<p class="docText">Despite its age, Make is still
 the most commonly used tool for building software. A large percentage 
of C/C++ projects use Make as their build tool, particularly for 
UNIX/Linux environments and older Microsoft Windows systems. Because of 
this popularity, university courses continue to teach the theory and 
practice of Make to prepare students for future employment. In the 
software industry, many developers have heard only about Make, not about
 the alternative tools.</p>

<p class="docText">This chapter focuses on the 
GNU version of Make because of the large number of platforms it 
supports. Before GNU Make became popular, each operating system vendor 
provided its own version of the Make tool that accepted a slightly 
different syntax than the other variants. Naturally, this made 
constructing a multiplatform build system difficult. You’ll take a look 
at other Make implementations at the end of the chapter.</p>

<p class="docText">As a reminder, the goal of 
this chapter is to give you an appreciation for the features and 
capabilities of the GNU Make tool. You won’t examine the tool in too 
much detail, but by the end of this chapter, you’ll have a better 
appreciation of how to use the GNU Make tool and how a makefile is 
written. If you plan to use GNU Make in your own build system, you 
should first refer to the tool’s own documentation [16].</p>

<p class="docText">Because of the complexity of 
GNU Make, you might find some of the discussion challenging to follow if
 you don’t already have experience writing a makefile. Make sure you’ve 
read and understood Chapter 2, or at least be prepared to work through the examples in great detail. Make-based build systems can be difficult to understand.</p>






</body>
</html>
