<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The GNU Make Programming Language</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
<h3>The GNU Make Programming Language</h3>

<p class="docText">The GNU Make tool is controlled by a user-written program script, stored in a file named <tt>Makefile</tt>.
 GNU Make provides a comprehensive programming language and gives a 
makefile developer enough functionality to describe the build process. 
You might find it useful to view the GNU Make language as three distinct
 programming languages integrated into one, each playing a slightly 
different role.</p>

<p class="docText">The three sublanguages are as follows:</p>

<ul>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">File dependencies:</span> A rule-based syntax for describing the dependency relationships between files. A Make program is “executed” by matching disk filenames
 against the rules that generate them. Instead of sequentially executing
 rules, GNU Make performs a pattern-matching operation to decide which 
rule to evaluate next.</p>
    <div class="docText">
      <pre>myprog: prog.c lib.c</pre>
    </div>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Shell commands:</span>
 A list of shell commands encapsulated within each rule, to be executed 
if the target of the rule is “out-of-date.” As with any shell script, 
each command invokes a separate program, such as <tt>ls</tt>, <tt>cat</tt>, or <tt>gcc</tt>. Commands are executed in the order they’re listed and can use shell metacharacters to control sequencing and I/O redirection.</p>
    <div class="docText">
      <pre>cp myfile yourfile &amp;&amp; cp myfile1 yourfile1
md5 &lt; myfile &gt;&gt;yourfile
touch yourfile.done</pre>
    </div>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">String processing:</span>
 A language for manipulating GNU Make variables, such as treating them 
as a list of values. This language uses the functional programming 
paradigm in which each function is passed one or more string values as 
input and returns a single string value as the result. By combining 
different function calls, complex expressions can be evaluated.</p>
    <div class="docText">
      <pre>VARS := $(sort $(filter srcs-% cflags-%, $(.VARIABLES)))</pre>
    </div>
  </li>
</ul>
<p class="docText">With this combination of programming styles, it’s 
possible to construct any type of build system, no matter how complex. 
Let’s start by looking at GNU Make’s syntax and basic concepts. Later 
you’ll examine how these can apply to real-world build scenarios.</p>


<h4>Makefile Rules to Construct the Dependency Graph</h4>

<p class="docText">To reiterate, a makefile consists of a number of 
rules, each describing how to generate a particular target file from one
 or more prerequisite input files. If the target file is out of date 
with respect to the input files, the sequence of shell commands is 
executed to bring it up-to-date. “Out-of-date” refers to the time stamp 
on the file being older than the files it was derived from. Therefore, 
the input files must have been changed more recently.</p>

<p class="docText">As you saw in Chapter 2, the following makefile is a simplistic way of translating the <tt>calculator</tt> program’s dependency graph into code that GNU Make can understand.</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre> 1  calculator: add.o calc.o mult.o sub.o
 2      gcc -g -o calculator add.o calc.o mult.o sub.o
 3
 4  add.o: add.c numbers.h
 5      gcc -g -c add.c
 6
 7  calc.o: calc.c numbers.h
 8      gcc -g -c calc.c
 9
10  mult.o: mult.c numbers.h
11      gcc -g -c mult.c
12
13  sub.o: sub.c numbers.h
14      gcc -g -c sub.c</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">Keep
 in mind that GNU Make’s rule-based language doesn’t execute 
sequentially, as would a program written in a procedural language. 
Instead, the whole mechanism is based on matching target filenames 
against whichever rule happens to match the name. As you see later, the 
target of a rule (the left side) can also contain wildcards and variable
 names, so locating a matching rule is not always a simple matter.</p>

<p class="docText">Let’s not go into too much detail quite yet; this 
chapter later examines GNU Make’s pattern-matching and rule-searching 
algorithm. First you’ll learn about the different rules you can create.</p>



<h4>Makefile Rule Types</h4>

<p class="docText">In addition to the simple rules you’ve seen so far, 
you can express dependencies in several other ways, making it easier for
 makefile developers to get their job done. GNU Make is a flexible and 
powerful language with a number of syntactical features for expressing 
the relationship between files. Consider some examples:</p>

<ul>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Rules with multiple targets:</span>
 The previous example had a single target file on the left side of the 
rule. However, the following syntactical shortcut is also allowed:</p>
    <div class="docText">
      <pre>file1.o file2.o: source1.c source2.c source3.c
        ... commands go here ...</pre>
    </div>
    <p class="docList">Of 
course, this works only if both targets have the same set of 
prerequisites and can be generated by the same list of shell commands.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Rules with no prerequisites:</span>
 Sometimes you want to define a target that doesn’t depend on any 
prerequisites. You can use this approach to define pseudotargets that 
don’t relate to actual disk files. In the following example, you’re 
defining the <tt>help</tt> target to display a synopsis of the commands the developer can use:</p>
    <div class="docText">
      <pre>.PHONY: help
help:
        @echo "Usage: make all ARCH=[i386|mips]"
        @echo "       make clean"</pre>
    </div>
    <p class="docList">If the developer types <tt>gmake help</tt>, no file named <tt>help</tt>
 exists on the disk, and the shell commands shouldn’t proceed to create 
that file. Additionally, the shell commands are executed every time the 
help target is invoked because no time stamp checking needs to be 
performed. Note the use of the <tt>PHONY</tt> directive to indicate that GNU Make should always execute the rule, even if somebody accidentally left a file named <tt>help</tt> sitting in the current directory.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Rules with patterns in the filename:</span> As you probably noticed, the previous calculator example contained a lot of repetition. For every object file, such as <tt>add.o</tt>, there was a dependency on the corresponding C file, such as <tt>add.c</tt>.
 Because there were four different source files, you had four different 
rules that all looked similar. You can use wildcard characters as a 
shortcut to specify that the target and prerequisite filenames must 
match.</p>
    <div class="docText">
      <pre>%.o: %.c
        ... commands go here ...</pre>
    </div>
    <p class="docList">This example matches any pair of files in which the target ends with <tt>.o</tt> and the prerequisite both ends with <tt>.c</tt> and also starts with the same sequence of characters (known as the <span class="docEmphStrong">stem</span>). In other words, a file <span class="docEmphasis">stem</span><tt>.o</tt> can be generated from the file <span class="docEmphasis">stem</span><tt>.c</tt> by executing the list of shell commands. When first asked to build the <tt>calculator</tt> target, GNU Make determines that <tt>calc.o</tt>, <tt>add.o</tt>, <tt>mult.o</tt>, and <tt>sub.o</tt> must all be generated and that this rule is capable of doing so.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Rules that apply only to certain files:</span> To make the pattern matching in rules more useful, it’s also possible to state which files the pattern applies to. For example:</p>
    <div class="docText">
      <pre>a.o b.o: %.o: %.c
     echo This rule is for a.o and b.o

c.o d.o: %.o: %.c
     echo This rule is for c.o and d.o</pre>
    </div>
    <p class="docList">By 
being more specific about the list of files, you can create more 
elaborate build systems. For example, you might want some object files 
to be compiled with an x86-target compiler, whereas other object files 
must be compiled with a MIPS compiler. Although you haven’t explored GNU
 Make
 variables in detail, this feature is a lot more useful if you have a 
list of several hundred files stored in a single variable.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Multiple rules with the same target:</span>
 It’s often more useful to split the list of prerequisites for a target 
across multiple rules than to define them all on the same line.</p>
    <div class="docText">
      <pre>chunk.o: chunk.c
     gcc –c chunk.c

chunk.o: chunk.h list.h data.h</pre>
    </div>
    <p class="docList">In this example, the rule states that <tt>chunk.o</tt> is generated from <tt>chunk.c</tt>, and a separate rule states that <tt>chunk.o</tt>
 has dependencies on several other C header files. Only one of these 
rules can contain a set of shell commands; the other rule simply 
contributes to the list of prerequisites.</p>
  </li>
</ul>
<p class="docText">If you’re curious about these and other ways of writing makefile rules, study the GNU Make reference manual for more examples.</p>



<h4>Makefile Variables</h4>

<p class="docText">As with any other language, writing a nontrivial 
program without using variables is difficult. The examples seen so far 
in this chapter have used hard-coded file names, but that won’t work in a
 large build system with hundreds of files. Let’s now see how GNU Make 
variables can simplify a makefile.</p>

<p class="docText">GNU Make variables are similar to those in other 
programming languages, but they have a few unique behaviors of their 
own. The rules are listed here:</p>







<table class="docText" border="0">
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td valign="top" width="25">
        <div class="docText">
          <b>1. </b>
        </div>
      </td>
      <td>
        <div class="docText">Variables are given a value by an assignment statement, such as <tt>X := 5</tt>. As you’ll see shortly, several types of assignment exist, each with their own semantics.<br/><br/></div>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td valign="top" width="25">
        <div class="docText">
          <b>2. </b>
        </div>
      </td>
      <td>
        <div class="docText">Variable values are referenced using the syntax <tt>$(X)</tt>.<br/><br/></div>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td valign="top" width="25">
        <div class="docText">
          <b>3. </b>
        </div>
      </td>
      <td>
        <div class="docText">All
 variables are of string type, with the valuecontaining zero or more 
characters. No mechanism exists for declaring variables before they’re 
used, so assigning to them for the first time creates the variable.<br/><br/></div>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td valign="top" width="25">
        <div class="docText">
          <b>4. </b>
        </div>
      </td>
      <td>
        <div class="docText">Variables have global scope, which means that all assignments and references to the variable <tt>X</tt> (within a single makefile) refer to the same variable.<br/><br/></div>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td valign="top" width="25">
        <div class="docText">
          <b>5. </b>
        </div>
      </td>
      <td>
        <div class="docText">Variable names can contain upper- and lowercase letters, numbers, and punctuation symbols such as <tt>@</tt>, <tt>^</tt>, <tt>&lt;</tt>, and <tt>&gt;</tt>. To make them more visible, this book typically uses uppercase letters in the examples, but that’s not a requirement.<br/><br/></div>
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
<p class="docText">To illustrate these rules, consider a simple example.
 You shouldn’t see any real surprises in this code, although an unusual 
feature is that strings don’t require quotation marks around them. 
Instead, they simply consume the remainder of the input line, with the 
exception of anything after the comment (<tt>#</tt>) character.</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre>1  FIRST := Hello there
2  SECOND := World    # comments go here
3  MESSAGE := $(FIRST) $(SECOND)
4  FILES := add.c sub.c mult.c
5  $(info $(MESSAGE) – The files are $(FILES))</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">The last line, containing the <tt>$(info ...)</tt> directive, displays the following message on the output:</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre>Hello there World – The files are add.c sub.c mult.c</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">Although this example shows only one type of assignment statement, several actually exist, each with its own semantics:</p>

<ul>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Immediate evaluation:</span> This is the case you’ve already seen, using the <tt>:=</tt>
 operator. The right side of the assignment is fully evaluated to a 
constant string and then assigned to the variable listed on the left 
side. Most modern programming languages use this type of immediate 
evaluation in their assignment statements.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Deferred evaluation:</span> This second type of assignment, using <tt>=</tt> instead of <tt>:=</tt>
 enables you to defer the evaluation of variables until they’re actually
 used instead of immediately converting them to a constant string. Now 
look at a case in which a variable is defined in terms of other 
variables.</p>
    <div class="docText">
      <pre>1  CC := gcc
2  CFLAGS := -g
3  CCOMP = $(CC) $(CFLAGS)  # observe the use of =
4  $(info Compiler is $(CCOMP))
5  CC := i386-linux-gcc
6  $(info Compiler is $(CCOMP))</pre>
    </div>
    <p class="docList">Note that line 3 uses deferred assignment (the <tt>=</tt> sign). When you execute this makefile, the right side of line 3 isn’t evaluated until the <tt>CCOMP</tt> variable is actually used (which, in this case, is on lines 4 and 6). Given that the <tt>CC</tt> variable is modified on line 5, the value of <tt>CCOMP</tt> changes when it’s used the second time.</p>
    <div class="docText">
      <pre>$ gmake
Compiler is gcc –g
Compiler is i386-linux-gcc -g</pre>
    </div>
    <p class="docList">This
 feature might seem a little awkward, but the capability to define 
variables and then modify individual parts of the variable later can be 
useful. You’ll see this again when you look at GNU Make’s built-in 
rules.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Conditional assignment:</span> In a third situation, you assign a value if the variable doesn’t already have one.</p>
    <div class="docText">
      <pre>1  CFLAGS := -g
2  CFLAGS ?= -O
3  $(info CFLAGS is $(CFLAGS))</pre>
    </div>
    <p class="docList">In this case, you supply a default value for <tt>CFLAGS</tt>
 (on line 2), which is used if the user hasn’t already provided a value 
earlier in the program (on line 1 here). Although this is an 
oversimplified example, this feature is useful when you include one 
makefile from within another, where the parent makefile might or might 
not want to explicitly define the <tt>CFLAGS</tt> variable. If it chooses not to, the default value is used.</p>
  </li>
</ul>
<p class="docText">Now let’s look at some of the variables and rules built into the tool, making it easier to construct a makefile.</p>



<h4>Built-In Variables and Rules</h4>

<p class="docText">GNU Make provides built-in rules and variables to address common build system requirements. First examine <span class="docEmphStrong">automatic variables</span>,
 so named because their value depends on the context in which they’re 
used. Unlike many other programming languages, GNU Make variable names 
can contain punctuation symbols such as <tt>@</tt>, <tt>&lt;</tt>, and <tt>^</tt>.</p>

<ul>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphRoman"><tt>$@</tt>:</span>
 Contains the filename of the current rule’s target. Instead of 
hard-coding the name of the target into the sequence of shell commands, 
you use <tt>$@</tt> to have it automatically inserted. This is handy 
when the rule uses wildcards to match the name of the target file and 
there’s no specific name to be hard-coded.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphRoman"><tt>$&lt;</tt>:</span> Represents the first prerequisite of a rule. As shown in the following example, you use <tt>$@</tt> to represent the target of the rule (the object file you’re generating), and you use <tt>$&lt;</tt> to represent the first source file in the list. (In this case, only one source file is mentioned in the rule.)</p>
    <div class="docText">
      <pre>%.o: %.c
     gcc –c –o $@ $&lt;</pre>
    </div>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphRoman"><tt>$^</tt>:</span> Similar to <tt>$&lt;</tt>, but it evaluates to the complete list of prerequisites in the rule, with spaces between them.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphRoman"><tt>$(@D)</tt>:</span> Evaluates to the directory containing the target of the rule. For example, if the target is <tt>/home/john/work/src.c</tt>, then <tt>$(@D)</tt> evaluates to /<tt>home/john/work</tt>. This is useful when you have a shell command such as <tt>mkdir</tt> that needs to manipulate the target file’s directory.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphRoman"><tt>$(@F)</tt>:</span> Similar to <tt>$(@D)</tt>, but evaluates to the base name of the target file. If the target is <tt>/home/john/work/src.c</tt>, then <tt>$(@F)</tt> evaluates to <tt>src.c</tt>.</p>
  </li>
</ul>
<p class="docText">Of course, many more variables are available in GNU Make, but they aren’t all listed here.</p>

<p class="docText">In addition to variables, GNU Make provides built-in 
rules. These are used for compiling C, C++, Yacc, and Fortran code, 
among others. Invoking GNU Make with the <tt>–p</tt> command-line option (<tt>gmake –p</tt>) shows you the rules built into the system. Here’s the built-in rule for C compilation.</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre>1  COMPILE.c = $(CC) $(CFLAGS) $(CPPFLAGS) $(TARGET_ARCH) –c
2  OUTPUT_OPTION = -o $@
3  %.o: %.c
4      $(COMPILE.c) $(OUTPUT_OPTION) $&lt;</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">This fragment shows a wildcard rule (lines 3 and 4) for generating <tt>.o</tt> files from the correspondingly named <tt>.c</tt> files. The automatic variables <tt>$@</tt> and <tt>$&lt;</tt> represent the target and prerequisite of the rule, which could be any matching pair of filenames that end in <tt>.o</tt> or <tt>.c</tt>, respectively. Notice also that line 1 of this rule uses deferred evaluation (the <tt>=</tt> sign), permitting developers to add their own values for <tt>CC</tt>, <tt>CFLAGS</tt>, <tt>CPPFLAGS</tt>, and <tt>TARGET_ARCH</tt>
 later. In theory, each time this wildcard rule is used, it could be 
with a different combination of flags, as set by the makefile developer.</p>

<p class="docText">As you saw in Chapter 2, the <tt>calculator</tt> example can be rewritten to take advantage of this built-in C compilation rule.</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre>1  calculator: add.o calc.o mult.o sub.o
2      gcc -g -o calculator add.o calc.o mult.o sub.o
3
4  add.o calc.o mult.o sub.o: numbers.h</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">That is, you can remove all the makefile rules that 
specify how to compile a C source file into an object file, because the 
implicit rule handles that case. To make the code even more readable, 
you can then define and reference a number of variables:</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre> 1  SRCS = add.c calc.c mult.c sub.c
 2  PROG = calculator
 3  CC = gcc
 4  CFLAGS = -g
 5  OBJS = $(SRCS:.c=.o)
 6
 7  $(PROG): $(OBJS)
 8      $(CC) $(CFLAGS) -o $@ $^
 9
10  $(OBJS): numbers.h</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">Note that <tt>CC</tt> and <tt>CFLAGS</tt> (lines 3 and 4) are implicitly inserted into the built-in C compilation rule that you saw earlier because <tt>COMPILE.c</tt> used deferred evaluation.</p>

<p class="docText">Line 5 uses some clever syntax to set <tt>OBJS</tt> to the same value as the <tt>SRCS</tt> variable (defined on line 1) but with all the <tt>.c</tt> extensions changed to <tt>.o</tt>.
 As you know from programming experience, it’s a bad idea to list all 
the filenames twice, so you instead define one variable in terms of the 
other.</p>

<p class="docText">Line 7 is still required to link the final 
executable, but this time you’re making use of variables instead of 
hard-coding filenames. Note that <tt>CC</tt> and <tt>CFLAGS</tt> are the
 same variables used when compiling source files into object files. If 
you decide to change to a different compiler or add new compilation 
flags, only lines 3 and 4 need to be modified.</p>

<p class="docText">Finally, line 10 states that all object files depend on <tt>numbers.h</tt>. This is shorter than the previous version, in which all the object files had to be listed.</p>



<h4>Data Structures and Functions</h4>

<p class="docText">All of GNU Make’s variables are of string type but 
this needn’t stop you from representing other data types, such as 
numbers, lists, and structures. The key to storing complex data is to 
find a way to represent information as a sequence of space-separated 
words. GNU Make has plenty of features for manipulating variables in 
this form.</p>

<p class="docText">The following are some typical data structures you might find yourself using:</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre>1 PROG_NAME := my-calculator
2 LIST_OF_SRCS := calc.c main.c math.h lib.c
3 COLORS := red FF0000 green 00FF00 blue 0000FF purple FF00FF
4 ORDERS := 100 green cups 200 blue plates</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">Line 1 is a standard variable assignment of a simple 
string, and you’ll see this type of assignment in almost every makefile.
 Line 2 is a common way of expressing lists of things, although, 
obviously, the elements of the list can’t contain spaces. This can be 
painful if you were planning to store <tt>C:\Program Files</tt> in a list.</p>

<p class="docText">Lines 3 and 4 demonstrate more complex data structures that you probably won’t use as often. For the <tt>ORDERS</tt>
 variable, element 1 is the quantity, element 2 is the color, and 
element 3 is the item to purchase. The pattern repeats itself for each 
additional order item. As long as you have a mechanism for extracting 
specific items out of a list, you can treat this variable like a 
structured data type.</p>

<p class="docText">Consider some of the most common functions for dealing with strings:</p>

<ul>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphRoman"><tt>words</tt>:</span> Given a list as input, returns the number of space-separated words in that list. In this example, <tt>$(NUM_FILES)</tt> evaluates to 4.</p>
    <div class="docText">
      <pre>NUM_FILES := $(words $(LIST_OF_SRCS))</pre>
    </div>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphRoman"><tt>word</tt>:</span> Given a list, extracts the nth word from that list. The list is 1-based, so <tt>$(SECOND_FILE)</tt> evaluates to <tt>main.c</tt>.</p>
    <div class="docText">
      <pre>SECOND_FILE := $(word 2, $(LIST_OF_SRCS))</pre>
    </div>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphRoman"><tt>filter</tt>:</span>
 Returns the words from a list, which match a specific pattern. A common
 use is to select a subset of files that match a specific filename 
pattern (such as all C source files).</p>
    <div class="docText">
      <pre>C_SRCS := $(filter %.c, $(LIST_OF_SRCS))</pre>
    </div>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphRoman"><tt>patsubst</tt>:</span> For each word in a list, replaces any that match a specific pattern with a replacement pattern. The <tt>%</tt>
 character identifies the part of each word that remains unchanged (the 
stem). Note that the first comma must not be followed by a space 
character; otherwise, the replacement list ends up with two spaces 
between each word.</p>
    <div class="docText">
      <pre>OBJECTS := $(patsubst %.c,%.o, $(C_SRCS))</pre>
    </div>
    <p class="docList">This example is similar to the <tt>$(C_SRCS:.c=.o)</tt> syntax you’ve already seen, with the resulting list being <tt>calc.o math.o lib.o</tt>.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphRoman"><tt>addprefix</tt>:</span> For each word in a list, prepends an additional string. In the following example, you add the <tt>objs/</tt> prefix to each element in the <tt>$(OBJECTS)</tt> list.</p>
    <div class="docText">
      <pre>OBJ_LIST := $(addprefix objs/, $(OBJECTS))</pre>
    </div>
    <p class="docList">In this case, <tt>$(OBJ_LIST)</tt> evaluates to <tt>objs/calc.o objs/main.o objs/lib.o</tt>.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphRoman"><tt>foreach</tt>:</span> Visits
 each word in a list and constructs a new list containing the “mapped” 
values. The mapping expression can consist of any combination of GNU 
Make function calls. The following example is identical to the <tt>addprefix</tt> case, in that you’re constructing a new list in which all the filenames are mapped to the expression <tt>obj/$(file)</tt>.</p>
    <div class="docText">
      <pre>OBJ_LIST_2 := $(foreach file, $(OBJECTS),objs/$(file))</pre>
    </div>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphRoman"><tt>dir/notdir</tt>:</span> Given a file’s pathname, returns the directory name component or the filename component.</p>
    <div class="docText">
      <pre>DEFN_PATH := src/headers/idl/interface.idl
DEFN_DIR := $(dir $(DEFN_PATH))
DEFN_BASENAME := $(notdir $(DEFN_PATH))</pre>
    </div>
    <p class="docList">In this case, <tt>$(DEFN_DIR)</tt> evaluates to <tt>src/headers/idl/</tt> (including the final <tt>/</tt>) and <tt>$(DEFN_BASENAME)</tt> evaluates to <tt>interface.idl</tt>.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphRoman"><tt>shell</tt>:</span>
 Executes a shell command and returns the command’s output as a string. 
The following example demonstrates a nonportable way of determining the 
owner of the <tt>/etc/passwd</tt> file. This assumes that the third word in the output of the <tt>ls –l</tt> command is the name of the file’s owner.</p>
    <div class="docText">
      <pre>PASSWD_OWNER := $(word 3, $(shell ls -l /etc/passwd))</pre>
    </div>
  </li>
</ul>
<p class="docText">In addition to these functions, and the many other 
functions listed in the GNU Make documentation, certain language 
features are designed to keep GNU Make programs short and concise.</p>

<p class="docText">First, the concept of a <span class="docEmphStrong">macro</span>
 enables you to associate a name with a complex GNU Make expression and 
to pass arguments into that expression. This enables you to write your 
own GNU Make functions, effectively extending the basic language. The 
following code defines a macro named <tt>file_size</tt> that returns the number of bytes in a file (again, this is nonportable). You use the <tt>$(1)</tt> syntax to reference the first parameter of the <tt>$(call)</tt> expression.</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre>file_size = $(word 5, $(shell ls -l $(1)))
PASSWD_SIZE := $(call file_size,/etc/passwd)</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">Another shortcut is to define a canned sequence of shell commands by using the <tt>define</tt>
 directive. When specifying the shell commands to be executed in GNU 
Make rule, you call upon that canned sequence instead of writing it out 
every time.</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre>define start-banner
    @echo ==============
    @echo Starting build
    @echo ==============
endef

.PHONY: all
all:
    $(start-banner)
    $(MAKE) -C lib1</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">These
 language features, and many more discussed in the GNU Make 
documentation, make it possible to construct powerful makefile-based 
build systems.</p>



<h4>Understanding Program Flow</h4>

<p class="docText">This discussion of the GNU Make programming language 
finishes with a study of how a GNU Make program flows—that is, in which 
sequence the makefile is scanned and interpreted, and in which order the
 various parts of the program are executed. You’ve seen many of GNU 
Make’s language features, but you also need to understand how and when 
these features are called into action.</p>

<p class="docText">You’ll explore three topics that are somewhat unrelated, except that they all deal with the flow of a GNU Make program:</p>





<table class="docText" border="0">
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td valign="top" width="25">
        <div class="docText">
          <b>1. </b>
        </div>
      </td>
      <td>
        <div class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Parsing a makefile:</span>
 Parsing a makefile involves two main phases: reading the makefile to 
build the dependency graph and then executing the compilation commands. 
Recall that a makefile is essentially a text-based representation of the
 dependency graph, which itself is a mathematical structure showing the 
relationship between files.<br/><br/></div>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td valign="top" width="25">
        <div class="docText">
          <b>2. </b>
        </div>
      </td>
      <td>
        <div class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Controlling the parsing process:</span>
 GNU Make provides a number of features for controlling how you include a
 submakefile, or conditionally compile parts of the makefile.<br/><br/></div>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td valign="top" width="25">
        <div class="docText">
          <b>3. </b>
        </div>
      </td>
      <td>
        <div class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Executing the rules:</span> The rule execution algorithm decides the order in which rules are applied and the corresponding shell commands are executed.<br/><br/></div>
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

<h5>Parsing a Makefile</h5>

<p class="docText">For the first topic, consider what happens when a developer invokes the <tt>gmake</tt> command:</p>




<table class="docText" border="0">
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td valign="top" width="25">
        <div class="docText">
          <b>1. </b>
        </div>
      </td>
      <td>
        <div class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">The makefile parsing phase:</span>
 The makefile is parsed and validated, and the full dependency graph is 
constructed. All rules are scanned, all variable assignments are 
performed, and all variables and functions are evaluated. Any problems that occur in the definition of rules or the construction of the dependency graph are reported at this time.<br/><br/></div>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td valign="top" width="25">
        <div class="docText">
          <b>2. </b>
        </div>
      </td>
      <td>
        <div class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">The rule execution phase:</span>
 When the entire dependency graph is in memory, GNU Make examines the 
time stamps on all the files to determine which files (if any) are out 
of date. If it finds any such targets, the appropriate shell commands 
are executed to bring those targets up-to-date. Any problems that occur 
within the shell commands are reported at this time.<br/><br/></div>
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
<p class="docText">Although in many cases you don’t need to be aware of 
these phases, this next example illustrates the difference between the 
two. Again, keep in mind that variables are assigned in the first phase 
and shell commands are executed in the second phase.</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre>1  X := Hello World
2
3  print:
4       echo X is $(X)
5
6  X := Goodbye</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">This example should seem straightforward, although you might be surprised to see the result of invoking the <tt>print</tt> target:</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre>$ gmake print
X is Goodbye</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">The reason is that line 4 (a shell command) is simply saved until the second phase, and <tt>$(X)</tt> is not evaluated at all. This means that the second assignment on line 6 dictates the value of <tt>$(X)</tt> to be used when the shell command is finally evaluated.</p>

<p class="docText">If you’re going to become a makefile expert, it’s 
important to feel comfortable with the operation of these two phases. 
Much of your build system’s functionality can be implemented either by 
using GNU Make functions (processed during the first phase) or as part 
of a shell script (processed during the second phase). Also, when you 
need to debug your makefile problems, you must understand the 
distinction between the two phases because different problems arise at 
each point in time.</p>



<h5>Controlling the Parsing Process</h5>

<p class="docText">Next, you must consider some additional flow-control features in GNU Make that impact the execution of a GNU Make-based program.</p>

<ul>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">File inclusion:</span> Similar to how C and C++ use the <tt>#include</tt> directive, GNU Make enables you to read additional files as if they were part of the main makefile.
 Any rules and variables defined inside the included file are treated as
 if they’re actually written inside the main file.</p>
    <div class="docText">
      <pre>FILES := src1.c src2.c

include prog.mk    # content of prog.mk textually
                   # inserted here

src1.o src2.o: src.h</pre>
    </div>
    <p class="docList">As you’ve seen, this 
approach can be used to include a framework file containing reusable 
sections of code. You’ll see another practical case of file inclusion 
later in this chapter.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Conditional compilation:</span> Similar to C/C++’s <tt>#ifdef</tt>
 directive, you can conditionally include or exclude parts of the 
makefile. This inclusion is done within the first phase of the makefile 
parsing, so the conditional expressions need to be pretty simple 
(instead of using shell commands).</p>
    <div class="docText">
      <pre>CFLAGS := -DPATH="/usr/local"
ifdef DEBUG
   CFLAGS += -g    # debug case if DEBUG is defined
else
   CFLAGS += -O    # non-debug case if DEBUG not defined
endif</pre>
    </div>
  </li>
</ul>

<h5>Executing the Rules</h5>

<p class="docText">Finally, let’s examine the algorithm GNU Make uses to
 construct a dependency graph, and see how the execution of the makefile
 flows as a result. Consider the main steps (with some of the detail 
left out for convenience).</p>






<table class="docText" border="0">
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td valign="top" width="25">
        <div class="docText">
          <b>1. </b>
        </div>
      </td>
      <td>
        <div class="docText">The developer who invokes GNU Make (with the <tt>gmake</tt>
 shell command) must specify which target to build. This is typically 
the name of an executable program, although you can also create 
pseudotargets such as <tt>all</tt> or <tt>install</tt> that don’t relate
 to actual disk files. If the developer doesn’t state which target file 
to build, GNU Make attempts to build the first target listed in the 
makefile (such as <tt>calculator</tt>).<br/><br/></div>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td valign="top" width="25">
        <div class="docText">
          <b>2. </b>
        </div>
      </td>
      <td>
        <div class="docText">If
 GNU Make locates a rule to generate the target file, it examines each 
of the prerequisites listed in that rule and treats them recursively as 
targets. This ensures that each file used as an input to a compilation 
tool is itself up-to-date. For example, before linking <tt>add.o</tt> and <tt>calc.o</tt> into the <tt>calculator</tt> executable program, GNU Make recursively searches for rules that have <tt>add.o</tt> or <tt>calc.o</tt> on the left side.<br/><br/></div>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td valign="top" width="25">
        <div class="docText">
          <b>3. </b>
        </div>
      </td>
      <td>
        <div class="docText">If
 a rule is found for the target you’re trying to satisfy (either the 
user-specified target or one that was found recursively), you have two 
options:<br/><br/><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If
 the target file for the rule doesn’t yet exist (there’s currently no 
disk file with that name), the rule’s shell command sequence is executed
 and the file is created for the first time. This is often the case when
 you’re compiling a completely fresh source tree and no object files 
have yet been created.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">On
 the other hand, if the target file already exists on the disk, the time
 stamp on each of the prerequisite files is examined to see if any are 
newer than the target file. If so, you proceed to regenerate the target,
 thereby making it newer than the input files.</p></div></li></ol></div></div>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td valign="top" width="25">
        <div class="docText">
          <b>4. </b>
        </div>
      </td>
      <td>
        <div class="docText">If step 3 fails, meaning that the makefile doesn’t contain a suitable rule to generate a target file, you also have two options:<br/><br/><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If
 the target file exists on the disk (but there’s no rule to regenerate 
it), GNU Make can only assume that this is a source file that was 
handwritten by the developer. This is where the rule recursion stops.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">If
 the target file doesn’t exist on the disk, GNU Make aborts with an 
error and the build fails. GNU Make doesn’t know how to regenerate the 
file, and because it doesn’t already exist on disk, you can’t proceed 
any further.</p></div></li></ol></div></div>
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
<p class="docText">Throughout this process, GNU Make doesn’t preserve 
any state between invocations and doesn’t maintain a database of file 
time stamps. It determines whether a file has changed by comparing the 
time stamps between the target and its prerequisites. As you’ll see in 
later chapters, build tools that record time stamps in a database can 
detect changes only by looking at that one file.</p>




<h4>Further Reading</h4>

<p class="docText">Although you’ve explored a number of GNU Make 
features, you need to learn more before you can create your own build 
system. The ultimate authority on GNU Make syntax and semantics is the 
online reference document [16]; this is fairly tough going for beginners, though, so you’ll probably want to start with a more introductory guide [41]. For more advanced best practices for using GNU Make, refer to [42] in References.</p>

<p class="docText">To simplify the construction of a makefile, consider using the GNU Make Standard Library [43]
 which adds an extra layer of language support for logical operators; 
manipulation of lists, strings, and sets; and basic arithmetic.</p>

<p class="docText">Now let’s study how to use the GNU Make language to address common build system scenarios.</p>




</body>
</html>
