<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Praise and Criticism</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
<h3>Praise and Criticism</h3>

<p class="docText">Having been around for more
 than 30 years, the Make tool (GNU Make being a modern version) has had 
plenty of opportunity to gather praise and criticism. Clearly, Make 
offers many benefits; otherwise, it would no longer be the most popular 
tool for C/C++ development. On the other hand, plenty of empirical 
experience has shown that Make has a number of flaws.</p>

<p class="docText">Let’s now review what users of
 Make have been saying. The following comments were either found on 
Internet web sites, published in books, or gathered via personal 
experience.</p>


<h4>Praise</h4>

<ul>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Wide support:</span>
 Make (particularly GNU Make) is widely supported on a large number of 
operating systems. Most software engineers have at least a passing 
knowledge of makefile construction, and quite a few people consider 
themselves to be makefile experts. Part of this widespread knowledge 
results from universities teaching Make as a standard build tool. The 
significant number of legacy build systems using Make is also a 
contributing factor.</p>
    <p class="docList">If
 you were starting a new software project, the fact that so many 
developers are already familiar with Make would likely convince you to 
use the same tool again. In addition, numerous Make-related tools (such 
as automatic makefile generators, automatic parallelization tools, and 
makefile editors) are available either commercially or for free. Make is
 clearly the best-supported build tool, at least for C/C++ development.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Very fast tool:</span>
 Being written in C, GNU Make is fast and highly optimized. Compared to 
other tools, GNU Make is extremely fast for computing and traversing the
 dependency graph. As a side note, some people counter this benefit by 
questioning whether speed is important if accuracy of the tool’s 
dependency information can’t be guaranteed.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Portable syntax:</span>
 GNU Make has a portable syntax and is available on a wide range of 
platforms, including Microsoft Windows. Before the introduction of GNU 
Make, developers were required to write a makefile that was compatible 
with every operating system’s variant of Make. They often were limited 
to using only the small subset of features that all Make implementations
 had in common. With GNU Make, the syntax is the same across all 
platforms, and you can use the entire set of the GNU Make’s features.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Fully featured programming language:</span>
 As a general-purpose dependency engine, Make can be used for any type 
of dependency analysis. As long as you can write a rule that maps input 
files to output files, there’s no limit on the type of compilation you 
can perform. Whereas other build tools might focus on C, C++, Java, or 
C# compilation, Make enables you to compile any type of file (such as 
creating PDF files from TeX source).</p>
    <p class="docList">It’s worth noting that GNU Make’s language is <span class="docEmphStrong">Turing complete</span>.
 This means that any program written in a general-purpose programming 
language can also be written as a GNU Make program. It would be 
incorrect to claim that “GNU Make can’t do that” because any feature of 
any other build tool can be implemented in GNU Make. (Just ask a Make 
guru how it can be done.)</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">The first tool:</span>
 Being the first build tool ever invented, Make paved the way for 
automated build systems. Newer tools would never have been able to 
improve on Make if it hadn’t first demonstrated what was possible.</p>
  </li>
</ul>


<h4>Criticism</h4>

<p class="docText">On the flip slide, there are many criticisms of the Make tool to be aware of:</p>

<ul>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Inconsistent language design:</span>
 GNU Make’s language has clearly grown over time, and the design hasn’t 
always stayed consistent. Some of the language features (such as rules) 
were part of the original Make design, but many other features were 
added over time as people found a need. In addition, the syntax for each
 of the features isn’t always consistent with the syntax of other 
features. This makes the language difficult for new developers to learn.</p>
    <p class="docList">Some of the common concerns include the following:</p>
    <ul>
      <li>
        <p class="docList">When
 writing a makefile rule, the shell commands must be indented by a tab 
character instead of by spaces. This syntactical rule has impacted 
almost everyone, especially if their editor automatically converts tabs 
to spaces.</p>
      </li>
      <li>
        <p class="docList">All
 makefile variables are global, so it can be challenging to determine 
where a variable is defined and whether you’re conflicting with a 
different variable that accidentally has the same name.</p>
      </li>
      <li>
        <p class="docList">Some parts of the makefile syntax ignore whitespace; in other parts, whitespace must be included.</p>
      </li>
      <li>
        <p class="docList">It
 can be confusing to determine which parts of a makefile enable you to 
write shell commands and which parts enable GNU Make functions.</p>
      </li>
      <li>
        <p class="docList">When
 invoking shell commands within a Make rule, you need to be familiar 
with the syntax of each command being invoked. Often a lot of 
inconsistency arises in the command-line arguments and return values 
each tool provides.</p>
      </li>
      <li>
        <p class="docList">For
 developers familiar with procedural programming (sequencing, loops, 
conditionals, and function calls), it can be challenging to write GNU 
Make code. In particular, it’s difficult to fit together the necessary 
shell commands, GNU Make functions, and user-defined macros to achieve 
the desired effect.</p>
      </li>
    </ul>
    <p class="docList">As a result of these syntax and semantic issues, a number of additional tools such as Automake and CMake (see Chapter 9,
 “CMake”) automatically generate a makefile from a higher-level 
description. This alleviates the need to learn the GNU Make syntax.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">No standard framework:</span>
 Although this chapter discussed using inclusive Make to solve a number 
of build system problems, no standard framework can be used as a 
starting point. GNU Make provides a powerful set of language features, 
but it wasn’t designed to work out-of-the-box for large software 
projects. In particular, the following important features must be 
implemented by hand:</p>
    <ul>
      <li>
        <p class="docList">Automatic
 dependency analysis for common languages such as C/C++. Without a good 
dependency system, the chance of introducing build failures is much 
higher.</p>
      </li>
      <li>
        <p class="docList">Multidirectory support with a single dependency graph for the whole build tree.</p>
      </li>
      <li>
        <p class="docList">C compiler flags that can be set on a per-directory or per-file basis.</p>
      </li>
      <li>
        <p class="docList">A mechanism for rebuilding object files if the C compiler flags are modified.</p>
      </li>
      <li>
        <p class="docList">A mechanism for abstracting out values such as <tt>SRCS</tt>, <tt>SUBDIRS</tt>, and <tt>CFLAGS</tt>, as was done with the <tt>Files.mk</tt> fragments.</p>
      </li>
    </ul>
    <p class="docList">Unfortunately,
 anybody using GNU Make is required to implement these features for 
themselves or perhaps borrow an existing framework from some other 
software project. In reality, it’s common to see each project using an 
entirely different framework that grows over time as new features are 
required. None of this is easy work.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Lack of portability:</span>
 Although GNU Make provides a consistent syntax across all operating 
systems, it’s unlikely that the syntax of the shell commands will be 
consistent. Each operating system is free to store its standard tools 
(such as <tt>ls</tt>, <tt>cat</tt>, <tt>sed</tt>, and <tt>grep</tt>)
 in whichever directory it likes, and it’s free to implement whichever 
optional tool features it desires. Even with modern versions of UNIX and
 Linux, some amount of inconsistency always seems to arise between shell
 commands.</p>
    <p class="docList">To make things easier, follow a couple good practices:</p>
    <ul>
      <li>
        <p class="docList">Use
 the standard GNU versions of command-line tools instead of the 
operating system’s own version. This at least guarantees that command 
options are consistent.</p>
      </li>
      <li>
        <p class="docList">Use makefile conditionals (such as <tt>ifdef SOLARIS</tt>)
 to select an appropriate tool or tool path that works on each operating
 system, and then use a variable to access the tool instead of 
hard-coding the name. For example, use <tt>$(RM) foo.o</tt> instead of <tt>rm foo.o</tt>.</p>
      </li>
    </ul>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Challenging debugging:</span>
 Many developers find it difficult to follow Make’s flow of control when
 filenames are being pattern-matched against rules. In contrast to most 
other programming languages, the flow of control isn’t sequential. This 
means that the next rule to be triggered could be defined at any point 
within the makefile system, including built-in rules and those included 
in <tt>Files.mk</tt> fragments. Before the use of 
the GNU Make debugger (a recent creation), developers were left to 
interpret confusing errors messages or to scan through complex listings 
of the dependency graph.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Language completeness versus ease of use:</span>
 Even though any general-purpose program can be implemented within the 
GNU Make programming environment, the real question is how much work 
needs to be done to make that happen. As you’ve seen already, 
constructing a complete GNU Make framework isn’t trivial and requires 
the author to have “guru” status. The authors must have a perfect 
understanding of GNU Make’s flow of control, as well as an intimate 
knowledge of GNU Make’s syntax and built-in functions. Finally, they 
need to have a handful of clever tricks to convince GNU Make to perform 
certain operations that aren’t officially supported.</p>
    <p class="docList">If
 you decide to create an inclusive Make framework for yourself, be 
prepared to devote a large amount of time (months, not weeks). You need 
to support your development team on an ongoing basis when it requests 
that new functionality be added. After all this work, you’ll end up with
 a solid build system, but be prepared for average software engineers to
 not have any understanding of how it works. After all, many people 
never get beyond the much simpler recursive Make systems, even with all 
the associated problems.</p>
  </li>
</ul>

<h4>Evaluation</h4>

<p class="docText">To summarize the GNU Make tool, let’s evaluate it against the build system quality measurements discussed in Chapter 1, “Build System Overview.”</p>

<ul>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Convenience:</span> <span class="docEmphasis">Poor</span>.
 As you’ve seen, creating a fully functioning build system is difficult.
 This includes the detection of implicit dependencies and the traversal 
of a full build tree. Although a simple makefile is quick and easy to 
construct, the tool is much less convenient for nontrivial build 
systems.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Correctness:</span> <span class="docEmphasis">Poor</span>.
 Because of the poor level of convenience, GNU Make is notorious for not
 producing a correct build image. It’s possible to guarantee a correct 
build, although the effort to do so can be enormous.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Performance:</span> <span class="docEmphasis">Excellent</span>.
 GNU Make is written in optimized C code and has an efficient algorithm 
for dependency analysis. Compared to other build tools discussed in 
later chapters, GNU Make is extremely fast.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Scalability:</span> <span class="docEmphasis">Excellent</span>.
 As with the performance criteria, GNU Make is highly scalable. The 
assumption is that you’ve already created a makefile framework that 
adequately supports multiple directories.</p>
  </li>
</ul>
<p class="docText">As a general rule, 
consider using GNU Make for legacy software that already uses a 
Make-based build system. However, if you’re writing a new build system 
for C/C++ software, first consider using SCons (Chapter 8) or CMake (Chapter 9). If you’re writing a build system for Java, consider using Ant (Chapter 7). For C# code, use MSBuild (discussed briefly in Chapter 7).
 If none of these tools meets your needs, especially for performance 
reasons, writing a new build system using GNU Make is a possibility.</p>

<p class="docText">Note that these evaluation criteria are subjective in nature, so your value judgment could be quite different.</p>




</body>
</html>
