<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 7. Ant</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 

<h2>Chapter 7. Ant</h2>



<p class="docText">The second build tool to examine is Apache Ant [50],
 maintained by the Apache Software Foundation. Ant is one of the most 
popular build tools for Java-based projects and has numerous features 
for compiling code in that environment. Few Java developers would 
consider using GNU Make for building Java code, even though it’s 
technically possible.</p>

<p class="docText">Ant was originally created as part of Apache Tomcat 
because existing build tools were too hard to use in multiplatform Java 
projects. Since being released as a standalone tool in 2000, Ant now 
runs on a diverse set of operating systems such as UNIX, Windows, OS/2 
Warp, OpenVMS, and Mac OS X.</p>

<p class="docText">One of the challenges in writing build systems for 
multiple operating systems (OS) is that each platform has its own 
peculiar set of commands and services. For example, in UNIX-like 
systems, the shell command for copying files is <tt>cp</tt>, whereas in the Windows environment, the command is <tt>copy</tt>. Naturally, writing a makefile rule that works smoothly on both platforms becomes difficult.</p>

<p class="docText">The approach Ant follows is to encapsulate each activity in the build system into a high-level <span class="docEmphStrong">task</span>.
 Instead of specifying the exact shell commands to be executed, you use a
 task to handle interaction with the operating system. Most of the time,
 end users don’t need to know or care which machine their build system 
is running on because an Ant-based build description works cleanly on 
all platforms.</p>

<p class="docText">The following Ant fragment defines a <span class="docEmphStrong">target</span> that contains a list of three tasks to be performed:</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre>...
 3      &lt;target name="all"&gt;
 4          &lt;mkdir dir="pkg"/&gt;
 5          &lt;jar basedir="obj" destfile="pkg/prog.jar"/&gt;
 6          &lt;copy file="index.txt" tofile="pkg/index.txt"/&gt;
 7      &lt;/target&gt;
...</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">The first task (line 4) creates a new directory named <tt>pkg</tt>. The task on line 5 finds all the files inside the <tt>obj</tt> directory and packages them into a Java JAR file named <tt>prog.jar</tt>. Finally, line 6 copies the <tt>index.txt</tt> file into the <tt>pkg</tt>
 directory. Given that Ant build descriptions are written in a 
platform-neutral way (using XML syntax), each operating system’s 
implementation of the Ant tool knows how to map the high-level task into
 an underlying shell command (such as <tt>cp</tt> or <tt>copy</tt>) or the relevant system calls.</p>

<p class="docText">Also note that no mention was made of interfile 
dependencies, which is a fundamental building block of GNU Make. Each 
task is responsible for knowing whether the underlying command actually 
needs to be executed. For example, the <tt>&lt;copy&gt;</tt> task first checks whether <tt>pkg/index.txt</tt> is newer than <tt>index.txt</tt>; if it is, it completes without actually copying any data.</p>

<p class="docText">An attractive quality of the Ant tool is the wide 
support from Java tool vendors. Most vendors supply additional Ant tasks
 to interact with their tool. Not only do these tasks manage the 
low-level interaction with the operating system, but they also perform 
the necessary dependency analysis. This approach enables seamless 
integration of the vendor’s tool into any existing Ant-based solution.</p>

<p class="docText">Additionally, all popular Java integrated development
 environments (IDEs) have the capability to create and execute Ant 
scripts, providing a strong integration into the development process. 
The breadth and depth of Ant’s support is a major reason for using Ant 
in your build projects.</p>

<p class="docText">This chapter starts by looking at Ant’s programming 
language and then shows how Ant solves a number of common build 
problems. Finally, it examines the pros and cons of using Ant and 
discusses a few similar build tools.</p>






</body>
</html>
