<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Praise and Criticism</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 

<h3>Praise and Criticism</h3>

<p class="docText">Ant
 has been around long enough to gather a large group of supporters, as 
well as plenty of people who dislike its programming model. Much of this
 discrepancy centers on whether they’re trying to use the well-supported
 Java compilation tasks or whether they’re creating a more complex build
 system that pushes Ant to its limits. Now see what people say about 
Ant.</p>


<h4>Praise</h4>

<p class="docText">Praise for Ant includes the following:</p>

<ul>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Cross-platform support:</span>
 Because Ant doesn’t use a shell-centric language, it has fewer 
cross-platform issues. By instead using the task abstraction, Ant 
developers no longer need to worry about each build machine’s specific 
commands and behavior.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Hidden dependency analysis:</span>
 Dependency analysis isn’t a key part of the language; instead, it’s 
handled within the implementation of each task. The end user doesn’t 
need to think about the dependency graph or debug problems related to 
missing dependencies.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Easy-to-learn the language:</span>
 Ant has few language constructs to learn, and most developers are 
familiar with the sequential model of execution. A clear separation also
 exists between the use of tasks and their underlying definition. 
Developers care about only the external behavior of each task and the 
set of configurable attributes. The complex implementation of each task 
is hidden away from view.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Extensive third-party support for Java:</span>
 Ant has the widest range of Java compilation tool and plug-in support. 
Although other Java build tools are starting to appear, Ant will likely 
continue to be the most popular tool in the Java world.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Important build system features are standard:</span>
 Build system features such as automatic dependency analysis and 
multidirectory support are a standard part of the build tool. In 
contrast to GNU Make, it’s not necessary to add an additional framework.</p>
  </li>
</ul>

<h4>Criticism</h4>

<p class="docText">Points of criticism include the following:</p>

<ul>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Lack of a full programming language:</span>
 Ant isn’t a scripting language, which makes it harder to perform 
nontrivial activities. Variables, looping, and conditionals are limited 
in support and often need to be emulated using confusing control 
structures.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Ugly and verbose XML:</span>
 Many people don’t like XML and find it hard to read or too verbose. 
This can be a barrier for new developers to adopt the tool and is a 
definite point of resistance for people who prefer the more concise 
syntax of GNU Make.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Not a dependency-based language:</span>
 Many developers prefer to add new pattern-based dependencies to trigger
 a compilation instead of wading through the Ant documentation to find a
 suitable task. If no task is available, they might waste a full day 
trying to piece together existing features to achieve the same result. 
In the end, the job could’ve been done in five minutes using GNU Make.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">No visible shell commands:</span>
 Ant doesn’t show which shell commands the tool is executing, so you 
don’t know exactly what’s happening. Instead, you need to trust the task
 implementation to do the right thing.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Nontrivial process of adding new tasks:</span>
 Adding a new compilation tool is much harder than with GNU Make. As you
 saw earlier, you need to write a Java-based plug-in instead of just 
matching the file extension. This can be a significant amount of work if
 you’re using a nonstandard compilation tool.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Lacking support for other languages:</span> Ant is Java-centric, with minimal support for other programming languages.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Confusing variable scope:</span>
 The scoping rules for Ant properties are quite different from rules in 
other programming languages and can therefore be confusing for new Ant 
developers.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Undefined variables that aren’t trapped:</span>
 When accessing an Ant property that hasn’t yet been assigned a value, 
the name of the property is used instead of reporting an error. For 
example, if careless programmers type <tt>${destfiel}</tt> instead of <tt>${destfile}</tt>, they’ll end up with a file in their local directory named <tt>${destfiel}</tt>. This happens instead of having the <tt>${destfile}</tt> property expanded to whatever value it contained.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">No persistent state:</span> Ant doesn’t cache any of the dependency information between builds, so all dependency analysis must be repeated each time the <tt>ant</tt> tool is invoked.</p>
  </li>
</ul>


<h4>Evaluation</h4>

<p class="docText">The
 Ant build tool clearly focuses on supporting build systems for 
Java-based software. The tasks are designed to support common operations
 such as Java compilation and the manipulation of JAR files. Each Ant 
task contains implicit knowledge of how to compute interfile dependency 
relationships, removing this from the developer’s list of things to 
worry about.</p>

<p class="docText">According to the build system quality metrics discussed in Chapter 1, “Build System Overview,” Ant receives the following evaluation:</p>

<ul>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Convenience:</span> <span class="docEmphasis">Good</span>.
 Ant simplifies the creation of a build system for Java-based software. 
It provides a wide range of tasks for common Java-related activities and
 alleviates the need to specify dependencies. However, Ant doesn’t 
provide a general-purpose programming language, making complex build 
systems challenging to implement.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Correctness:</span> <span class="docEmphasis">Excellent.</span>
 Ant’s automatic dependency analysis makes creating a correct and 
reliable build system easy. There’s little chance of incorrect 
dependencies being introduced. The only limitation is that tasks can be 
listed in the wrong order, but this problem is easy to detect.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Performance:</span> <span class="docEmphasis">Good</span>.
 Ant provides adequate performance, although it is not known for being 
exceptionally fast. The fact that each task is responsible for checking 
its own set of dependencies makes the invocation of tasks slower than 
GNU Make.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Scalability:</span> <span class="docEmphasis">Excellent</span>. Ant can scale to support large build systems. By interconnecting multiple <tt>build.xml</tt> files, any size of build system can be supported.</p>
  </li>
</ul>
<p class="docText">Ant clearly has a 
well-established place in the world of build systems, but only for 
Java-based software. If you’re building C/C++ code, consider using SCons
 (Chapter 8) or CMake (Chapter 9).
 For small and simple Java projects, consider using Eclipse to build 
your software within the IDE environment. For Microsoft languages, such 
as C#, consider using the MSBuild tool discussed shortly.</p>




</body>
</html>
