<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Similar Tools</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
<h3>Similar Tools</h3>

<p class="docText">The introduction of 
the Ant tool has clearly made people think differently about 
constructing build systems, with a few newer tools taking a similar 
approach. The first tool, NAnt, is a direct copy of Ant for the .NET 
environment, whereas the MSBuild tool has taken a slightly different approach with both syntax and semantics.</p>


<h4>NAnt</h4>

<p class="docText">The NAnt tool [53] is extremely similar to Ant but focuses on the .NET range of languages instead of Java. The following example shows a <tt>NAnt.Build</tt> file that compiles and links a simple C# program:</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre> 1  &lt;project name="hello" default="compile"&gt;
 2
 3      &lt;target name="compile"&gt;
 4          &lt;csc target="exe" output="hello.exe"&gt;
 5              &lt;sources&gt;
 6                  &lt;include name="*.cs" /&gt;
 7              &lt;/sources&gt;
 8          &lt;/csc&gt;
 9     &lt;/target&gt;
10
11  &lt;/project&gt;</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">The basic language 
features are mostly the same, and Ant developers won’t have trouble 
reading or writing a NAnt script. Unfortunately, the NAnt tool is not as
 well documented or supported as the original Ant tool.</p>



<h4>MSBuild</h4>

<p class="docText">The MSBuild tool from 
Microsoft is most commonly used as part of the Visual Studio development
 environment, replacing the much older NMake tool (see Chapter 6).
 From a syntax perspective, Ant and MSBuild have many similarities, 
along with some interesting differences. The official Microsoft 
documentation for MSBuild [54] provides a fair amount of technical information, although, for a gentler introduction, you should refer to [55].</p>

<p class="docText">Just as Ant uses <tt>build.xml</tt> files, MSBuild uses <tt>.proj</tt>
 files to store the build description. Visual Studio can automatically 
generate these, or you can write them by hand. Here’s a simple example 
of compiling three C# files into a <tt>HelloWorld.exe</tt> program.</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre> 1  &lt;Project DefaultTargets="Build"
 2      xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/developer/
        msbuild/2003" &gt;
 3
 4     &lt;PropertyGroup&gt;
 5         &lt;ExeFile&gt;HelloWorld.exe&lt;/ExeFile&gt;
 6     &lt;/PropertyGroup&gt;
 7
 8     &lt;ItemGroup&gt;
 9         &lt;MySource Include="goodbye.cs;hello.cs;main.cs"/&gt;
10     &lt;/ItemGroup&gt;
11
12     &lt;Target Name = "Build" Inputs="@(MySource)"
       Outputs="$(exeFile)"&gt;
13         &lt;CSC Sources="@(MySource)"
           OutputAssembly="$(exeFile)"/&gt;
14     &lt;/Target&gt;
15
16  &lt;/Project&gt;</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">Although the syntax is a 
little different from an Ant program, you should be able to get the 
general idea of what this program does. Looking in detail at each part 
of this file reveals a few differences.</p>

<p class="docText">Lines 4–6 define a new property named <tt>ExeFile</tt> and assigns it the value <tt>HelloWorld.exe</tt>. This syntax is a bit unusual because the <tt>&lt;ExeFile&gt;</tt>
 tag provides the name of the new property instead of being a tag that’s
 already built into the XML schema. With Ant, you would have used the 
predefined <tt>&lt;property name="ExeFile"&gt;</tt> sequence.</p>

<p class="docText">Lines 8–10 define the list of source files to be compiled, similar to Ant’s <tt>&lt;fileset&gt;</tt> concept. Note again that the <tt>&lt;MySource&gt;</tt> tag defines the name of this group of items.</p>

<p class="docText">Lines 12–14 define the <tt>Build</tt> target that performs the compilation work. Line 13 uses the <tt>&lt;CSC&gt;</tt> task to compile the source files into an executable program (assembly). Note the use of <tt>@(...)</tt> to refer to the group of source files, and the <tt>$(...)</tt> syntax to refer to a property’s value.</p>

<p class="docText">The significant difference between Ant and MSBuild appears on line 12. The <tt>Inputs</tt> and <tt>Output</tt>
 attributes are explicitly listed here because MSBuild doesn’t require 
that each task implement its own dependency checking. The MSBuild tool 
contains a full dependency engine, which is similar to that of GNU Make.
 Failure to supply these attributes causes the <tt>&lt;CSC&gt;</tt> task to execute every time, regardless of whether the source files have changed.</p>

<p class="docText">Although this 
dependency-analysis technique places a greater burden on the developer, 
MSBuild completely skips targets with up-to-date files. This is in 
contrast to Ant, in which each task must be partially executed each 
time, even if Ant determines there’s no work to be done. The value of 
this approach depends entirely on whether you care about build 
performance (when you manually provide the dependencies) or the reduced 
effort of having each task do its own analysis.</p>

<p class="docText">MSBuild will clearly 
continue to be the most popular build tool in the .NET development 
environment, largely because of its integration with Visual Studio and 
support for Microsoft compilers.</p>




</body>
</html>
