<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Real-World Build System Scenarios</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
<h3>Real-World Build System Scenarios</h3>

<p class="docText">As with the other build tools 
described in this book, this section considers how CMake can address a 
number of real-world build system scenarios. CMake’s language features 
are similar to those in other build tools, so this section describes the
 detail of these solutions when it’s not already obvious.</p>


<h4>Scenario 1: Source Code in a Single Directory</h4>

<p class="docText">The first scenario is extremely simple to implement, making CMake a great tool to use for small projects.</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre>1  project (scenario-1)
2  add_executable (calculator add sub mult calc)</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">Keep
 in mind that when CMake generates a native build system, it adds a 
number of standard features, such as automatic dependency analysis.</p>



<h4>Scenario 2: Source Code in Multiple Directories</h4>

<p class="docText">The second scenario 
shows how to use CMake for larger projects in which the build 
description is divided across multiple directories. You haven’t yet seen
 the <tt>add_subdirectory</tt> command, but there should be no surprises in the way it works.</p>

<p class="docText">The first build description file, <tt>src/CMakeLists.txt</tt>, appears at the top level of the build tree and recursively includes content from the subdirectories.</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre>1  project (scenario-2)
2
3  cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 2.6)
4
5  add_subdirectory(libmath)
6  add_subdirectory(libprint)
7  add_subdirectory(calc)</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">The second build description file, <tt>src/libmath/CMakeLists.txt</tt>, builds the <tt>Math</tt> library using the <tt>add_library</tt> command.</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre>1  add_library(Math clock letter number)</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">Next, <tt>src/libprint/CMakeLists.txt</tt> builds the <tt>Print</tt> library in the same way.</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre>1  add_library(Print banner.c center.c normal.c)</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">Finally, <tt>src/calc/CMakeLists.t</tt>xt pulls everything together by creating an executable file and linking it with the <tt>Math</tt> and <tt>Print</tt> libraries.</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre>1  add_executable (calculator calc.c)
2  target_link_libraries (calculator Math Print)</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">To make use of this build description, you again execute the <tt>cmake</tt>
 tool. This step is the same as in previous examples, so the output 
isn’t interesting to show. Finally, you use the native build tool (in 
this case, GNU Make) to compile the finished product.</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre class="preFixedHeight">$ gmake
Scanning dependencies of target Math
[ 14%] Building C object libmath/CMakeFiles/Math.dir/
clock.c.o
[ 28%] Building C object libmath/CMakeFiles/Math.dir/
       letter.c.o
[ 42%] Building C object libmath/CMakeFiles/Math.dir/
       number.c.o
Linking C static library libMath.a
[ 42%] Built target Math
Scanning dependencies of target Print
[ 57%] Building C object libprint/CMakeFiles/Print.dir/
       banner.c.o
[ 71%] Building C object libprint/CMakeFiles/Print.dir/
       center.c.o
[ 85%] Building C object libprint/CMakeFiles/Print.dir/
       normal.c.o
Linking C static library libPrint.a
[ 85%] Built target Print
Scanning dependencies of target calculator
[100%] Building C object calc/CMakeFiles/calculator.dir/
       calc.c.o
Linking C executable calculator
[100%] Built target calculator

					  </pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">One
 of the many advantages of using a CMake-generated build system is that 
the subbuild problem is solved and dependencies into other 
subdirectories are dealt with correctly. For example, if you build in 
the <tt>libmath</tt> directory, only that library is rebuilt:</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre>$ cd obj/libmath
$ gmake
[100%] Built target Math</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">However, if you build in the <tt>calc</tt> directory, both the <tt>Print</tt> and <tt>Math</tt> libraries are also considered for recompilation:</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre>$ cd obj/calc
$ gmake
[ 42%] Built target Print
[ 85%] Built target Math
[100%] Built target calculator</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">As you can see, CMake generates
 a fully featured Make-based build system without requiring the 
developer to understand anything about the underlying framework.</p>



<h4>Scenario 3: Defining New Compilation Tools</h4>

<p class="docText">Adding the <tt>mathcomp</tt> compiler into a CMake-based build system requires using the <tt>add_custom_command</tt> directive. In addition, you use the <tt>execute_process</tt> command to gather the dependencies. Finally, you wrap the whole solution inside a macro to make it more convenient to use.</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre class="preFixedHeight"> 1  project (scenario-3)
 2
 3  cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 2.6)
 4
 5  macro (mathcomp FUNC_NAME INPUT_FILE OUTPUT_FILE)
 6     execute_process(
 7         COMMAND /tools/bin/mathcomp -d ${INPUT_FILE}
 8         OUTPUT_VARIABLE DEPS
 9    )
10    separate_arguments(DEPS)
11
12    add_custom_command(
13        OUTPUT ${OUTPUT_FILE}
14        COMMAND /tools/bin/mathcomp -c -o ${OUTPUT_FILE}
15                -f ${FUNC_NAME} ${INPUT_FILE}
16        DEPENDS ${DEPS}
17    )
18  endmacro (mathcomp)
19
20  mathcomp(equations ${PROJECT_SOURCE_DIR}/equations.math
    equations.c)
21  add_executable (calculator calculator.c equations.c)

					  </pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">Lines 5–18 define a macro that encapsulates the complexity of this solution. Line 20 invokes this macro to generate the <tt>equations.c</tt> output file from the <tt>equations.math</tt> input file. The build system executes from within the object directory, so you use the <tt>PROJECT_SOURCE_DIR</tt> variable to access the source file.</p>

<p class="docText">Looking now at the macro definition, lines 6–9 invoke the <tt>mathcomp</tt> compiler with the <tt>-d</tt> option, to determine the dependencies present in the <tt>.math</tt> file. The output from this command is placed in the <tt>DEPS</tt> variable. On line 10, this space-separated output is translated into a list of separate filenames.</p>

<p class="docText">The <tt>add_custom_command</tt>
 directive on lines 12–17 is now fairly straightforward. You already 
know the name of the output file, and you’ve just computed the list of 
dependencies. The <tt>/tools/bin/mathcomp</tt> compiler is ready to be invoked in the same way you did for GNU Make, Ant, and SCons.</p>

<p class="docText">One final observation is that <tt>add_custom_command</tt> makes the new tool available for use by the native build system. That is, when the native build system needs to create the <tt>equations.c</tt> file, it directly invokes the <tt>mathcomp</tt> compiler. However, notice that the <tt>execute_process</tt> command determines the source file dependencies. This command is used only when the <tt>cmake</tt> tool is initially invoked, which is before the native build tool is ever called into action.</p>

<p class="docText">The limitation here is 
that when source files are modified, the native build system won’t 
notice if any dependencies have changed. Before long, the build system 
starts using outdated information. CMake solves this problem for C and C++ files by requiring the <tt>IMPLICIT_DEPENDS</tt> keyword for the <tt>add_custom_command</tt> directive. To support this same feature for the <tt>mathcomp</tt> tool, the standard CMake system must be modified.</p>



<h4>Scenario 4: Building with Multiple Variants</h4>

<p class="docText">The multivariant 
scenario takes advantage of the configuration cache, where the user can 
indicate which CPU type to compile for (<tt>i386</tt>, <tt>powerpc</tt>, or <tt>alpha</tt>).
 The build system then validates the selection and chooses a suitable 
compiler for that CPU type. Unlike the GNU Make and SCons solutions, 
there’s no requirement to create a per-CPU build directory. Instead, 
CMake already requires users to create their own directory for object 
files.</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre>$ mkdir obj-alpha
$ cd obj-alpha
$ cmake -DPLATFORM=alpha ../src</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">Alternatively, the <tt>ccmake</tt> command (refer to Figure 9.2) can provide a more interactive user experience. The CMake build description is as follows:</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre> 1  project (scenario-4)
 2
 3  set (PLATFORM i386 CACHE STRING "CPU Type: i386, powerpc
    or alpha")
 4
 5  if (NOT ${PLATFORM} MATCHES "^(i386|powerpc|alpha)$")
 6    message(SEND_ERROR
 7         "Invalid PLATFORM. Must be one of i386, powerpc or
           alpha")
 8  endif ()
 9
10  message("Compiling code for platform ${PLATFORM}")
11
12  set (CMAKE_C_COMPILER /tools/bin/gcc-${PLATFORM})
13
14  add_executable (calculator add sub mult calc)</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">Line 3 demonstrates the creation of a new cache variable named <tt>PLATFORM</tt>. This command is similar to a standard <tt>set</tt> command, except that you use the <tt>CACHE</tt>
 keyword to indicate that the user can configure the value when 
generating a new native build system. As usual, the default CPU type is <tt>i386</tt>; in this case, a text string (“<tt>CPU Type: i386, powerpc or alpha</tt>”) is provided as a prompt to the user.</p>

<p class="docText">The rest of the build 
description is easy to understand. Lines 5–10 validate the user’s input 
and provide a suitable message. Line 12 selects the compiler to be used (<tt>CMAKE_C_COMPILER</tt> is another standard cache variable). Finally, line 14 generates the executable program.</p>




<h4>Scenario 5: Cleaning a Build Tree</h4>

<p class="docText">As
 you might expect, the native build system created by CMake already 
supports a “clean” target for any object files it knows about. If <tt>add_executable</tt> or <tt>add_library</tt>
 is used to compile source files, CMake already knows the name of the 
executable or library file, as well as any intermediate object files. 
For generated files that aren’t automatically detected, the name can be 
listed in the <tt>ADDITIONAL_MAKE_CLEAN_FILES</tt> property. This is a per-directory property that contains the list of files to be removed from that directory.</p>



<h4>Scenario 6: Debugging Incorrect Builds</h4>

<p class="docText">CMake’s two-phase approach to 
building software makes debugging a little more challenging. In some 
cases, the problem lies in the original <tt>CMakeLists.txt</tt>
 file, but in less common cases, a problem might arise in the native 
(auto-generated) build system. Even if the bug was caused by an error in
 the high-level description, you might locate the problem only when 
running the native build tool.</p>

<p class="docText">Start by focusing on the debug 
facilities that the CMake tool provides. These are used to analyze 
CMake’s flow of control as it generates the native build system:</p>

<ul>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">The <span class="docEmphRoman"><tt>--system-information</tt></span> flag:</span> Provides an extensive dump of information about the build machine as it executes the <tt>cmake</tt>
 command. This includes the location of compilation tools, the choice of
 command-line options to pass to each tool, and various other 
system-dependent parameters. If you suspect that an invalid tool or 
command-line option is used, start by validating this output.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">The <span class="docEmphRoman"><tt>--trace</tt></span> flag:</span>
 Provides a line-by-line trace of CMake’s execution. Every variable 
assignment, condition, loop, macro, and command is displayed in the 
order in which it’s executed. By following along with the trace output, 
you can validate your expectations on how the program should execute.</p>
  </li>
</ul>
<p class="docText">If observing the CMake 
generator in action didn’t solve your problem, try using the native 
build tool’s debugging features. Each build tool, such as GNU Make, has 
its own range of options for tracing the build system’s execution. If 
you manage to locate the source of the problem, you need to work 
backward and identify which lines in the <tt>CMakeLists.txt</tt> are causing the issue.</p>

<p class="docText">The tricky part is when
 the native build system contains a complex framework that you had no 
involvement in writing. You might be able to scour the framework to locate the problem, but executing the build and watching the output is usually much easier. Invoking <tt>gmake</tt> with the <tt>VERBOSE=1</tt> flag provides a nicely formatted output to show each of the compilation commands.</p>

<p class="docText">In the worst case, the native build system might contain a bug, even though the <tt>CMakeLists.txt</tt>
 file is correct. In this case, you have no choice but to fix the CMake 
tool itself. Some people might find it tempting to fix the bug directly 
in the native build system, but the CMake generator would soon overwrite
 any changes.</p>




</body>
</html>
