<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Praise and Criticism</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
<h3>Praise and Criticism</h3>

<p class="docText">CMake isn’t as well known as 
other build tools, such as GNU Make and Ant, so there isn’t as much 
feedback on the use of the tool. However, vocal users have provided the 
following opinion.</p>


<h4>Praise</h4>

<ul>
  <li>
    <p class="docList">CMake can use the same
 description file to generate a build system for a range of different 
platforms. This is particularly important for Microsoft Windows systems,
 which haven’t typically received much support in the open-source world.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docList">The CMake build description language is simple to use, and creating a new build system is trivial.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docList">The
 generation of native build systems is high quality, with a lot of focus
 placed on the correctness of the build process. This contrasts with a 
standard GNU Make build system, in which developers must create and 
debug their own framework.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docList">CMake is just as easy to use as the SCons build tool, and the resulting build system is much faster.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docList">The
 integration of CPack for packaging and installation and CTest for 
testing purposes allows for a complete end-to-end build system.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docList">The special-purpose build description language is built into the <tt>cmake</tt> tool. Therefore, there’s no need to install an additional language interpreter (such as Python) on the build machine.</p>
  </li>
</ul>


<h4>Criticism</h4>

<p class="docText">In contrast, the following concerns have been raised regarding the CMake tool:</p>

<ul>
  <li>
    <p class="docList">Autogenerated build 
systems don’t give you the complete power you might expect. If you’re 
creating a complex build system, you might feel inclined to develop 
directly with the native build tool. This is also true if the 
autogenerated build system is buggy.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docList">The
 CMake tool introduces yet another language instead of building upon the
 power of an existing language. The learning curve for CMake is quite 
high, especially with all the advanced features that use an unfamiliar 
syntax.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docList">The CMake
 documentation is not as readable as the documentation for other build 
tools. You might find that some of the examples aren’t explicit enough 
to provide the help you need; in some cases, the documentation doesn’t 
match the tool’s behavior.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docList">Although
 CMake does support cross-platform development, in many places it’s 
still necessary to write different build description code for a Linux 
environment versus a Windows environment.</p>
  </li>
</ul>

<h4>Evaluation</h4>

<p class="docText">Let’s evaluate CMake against the build system quality measurements discussed in Chapter 1, “Build System Overview.”</p>

<ul>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Convenience:</span> <span class="docEmphasis">Good</span>:
 CMake wins points for supporting a high-level abstraction of the build 
system, making it easy for developers to describe their build process. 
However, CMake doesn’t provide a general-purpose programming language, 
making it hard to express complex requirements. Additionally, the 
capability to debug build problems largely depends on the native build 
tool (such as GNU Make), as well as an understanding of CMake’s 
autogenerated framework.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Correctness:</span> <span class="docEmphasis">Excellent</span>:
 Regardless of which native build tool is used, CMake ensures that 
multidirectory support is enabled, along with automatically detecting 
dependencies.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Performance:</span> <span class="docEmphasis">Excellent</span>: Although it depends entirely on the native build tool, CMake has the potential to create a high-performance build system.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Scalability:</span> <span class="docEmphasis">Excellent</span>:
 For the same reason, CMake can generate a highly scalable build system 
supporting a large number of source files and file system directories.</p>
  </li>
</ul>
<p class="docText">CMake is an excellent choice
 of build tool for C/C++-based projects, and directly competes with 
SCons in this area. CMake however has the added value of supporting 
native build tools, enabling the use of platform or vendor-specific 
optimizations for those tools, some of which we’ll discuss in Chapter 19, “Faster Builds.” CMake isn’t a good choice for Java or C# development.</p>




</body>
</html>
