<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Similar Build Tools</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
<h3>Similar Build Tools</h3>

<p class="docText">CMake isn’t the only build 
tool that generates a native build system, and it certainly wasn’t the 
first. This section briefly discusses the Automake and Qmake build 
tools, which both take a similar approach.</p>


<h4>Automake</h4>

<p class="docText">The Automake build tool is part of the Autotools suite [63], which is discussed in Chapter 15, “Build Machines.” The most common tool from the suite is Autoconf, which is responsible for generating the GNU <tt>configure</tt>
 script that many UNIX developers are familiar with. In contrast, 
Automake focuses on creating a makefile framework based on a high-level 
description of the build process.</p>

<p class="docText">The Autotools suite is tightly 
coupled to the GNU development environment and is therefore dependent on
 UNIX-like systems. The build description for Automake is simple to 
understand, at least for small programs. Here’s the <tt>Makefile.am</tt> file for the <tt>calculator</tt> program:</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre>1  bin_PROGRAMS = calculator
2  calculator_SOURCES = add.c sub.c mult.c calc.c</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">The syntax of each variable name indicates the purpose of the values on the right side. For example, <tt>bin_PROGRAMS</tt> indicates that the <tt>calculator</tt> program should be installed into the default <tt>bin</tt> directory whenever the user issues the <tt>make install</tt> command. Also, the <tt>calculator_SOURCES</tt> variable provides the list of files to be compiled and linked into the <tt>calculator</tt> program.</p>

<p class="docText">As you might expect, running the <tt>automake</tt> tool on this build description creates a makefile that provides all the default targets (including <tt>all</tt>, <tt>clean</tt>, and <tt>install</tt>). It also hides the complexities of creating a makefile framework, such as automatic dependency analysis.</p>

<p class="docText">CMake
 is generally considered as a replacement for the Autotools suite, 
especially for software that needs to run on non-UNIX systems. CMake’s 
capability to adapt to different build machines makes it a worthy 
competitor for Automake. On the other hand, the large amount of legacy 
software that uses Autotools suggests it’ll continue to be one of the 
most popular makefile-generation systems.</p>



<h4>Qmake</h4>

<p class="docText">The Qmake build tool is part of the Qt development environment [64].
 Qt was specifically designed for cross-platform application 
development, providing a uniform set of GUI functions across all 
supported platforms. Naturally, the Qmake tool was also designed with 
this goal in mind.</p>

<p class="docText">The build description file for Qmake is similar to that of other tools, at least for simple programs:</p>

<div class="docText">
  <pre>1  TARGET = calculator
2  SOURCES = add.c sub.c mult.c calc.c
3  HEADERS = numbers.h</pre>
</div>
<br/>
<p class="docText">Qmake can generate either a 
makefile framework or a Visual Studio project. Because Qmake is targeted
 at Qt developers, the build system automatically includes the necessary
 C/C++ header file directories and libraries to support a Qt-based 
application.</p>

<p class="docText">If you’re planning to develop a cross-platform application, both Qt and Qmake are definitely worth investigating.</p>




</body>
</html>
