<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 10. Eclipse</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 

<h2>Chapter 10. Eclipse</h2>



<p class="docText">The fifth and final build 
tool this book studies isn’t actually a build tool at all. The Eclipse 
integrated development environment (IDE) [33]
 provides a complete set of development tools for code editing, 
compilation, version control, testing, and tracking of tasks. The build 
functionality in Eclipse is just one part of the wider toolset, and in 
many cases, the compilation happens behind the scenes; you don’t even 
know it’s taking place.</p>

<p class="docText">Although Eclipse is most well 
known for its Java support, it also provides development tools for C, 
C++, Python, Perl, PHP, UML, and many other languages. Eclipse is fully 
extensible, and any vendor can add support for its own tools and 
languages. Since 2001, Eclipse has been an open-source product, but it 
continues to be sponsored by IBM (the original owner) and a number of 
other industry leaders.</p>

<p class="docText">If you haven’t 
considered using Eclipse in your own development environment, you should
 definitely do so. Even if you’re an expert with editors such as <tt>vi</tt> or <tt>emacs</tt>,
 Eclipse can still increase your productivity. Eclipse can suggest what 
you might want to type next; it can collapse parts of the code you’re 
not interested in seeing; it enables you to browse the classes defined 
within your program; and it can highlight compilation errors a few 
seconds after you type the bad code. Eclipse comes with a learning curve
 to use these exciting features, but most users see their productivity 
increase in the long term.</p>

<p class="docText">As you might expect, this 
chapter focuses exclusively on the compilation features built into 
Eclipse. Although Eclipse can compile a wide range of Java programs, 
including web services and JSF and JSP code, this chapter focuses on 
building standard Java classes and JAR files, using the Java Development
 Tools (JDT) plug-in. As usual, you’ll consider how Eclipse can be used 
in real-world scenarios.</p>

<p class="docText">The key observation to make 
as you study Eclipse is that the edit-compile-run cycle is dramatically 
different. No longer are these phases clearly defined: They don’t
 have to be, because the Eclipse GUI makes them work together 
seamlessly. You’ll also notice that you don’t write a build description 
file (such as a makefile): Eclipse already knows enough about the 
structure of the software. Relying on the GUI to provide the build 
functionality makes constructing a build system easy but also limits the
 set of available features.</p>

<p class="docText">This chapter follows the same format as for the previous build tools.</p>






</body>
</html>
