<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Praise and Criticism</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
<h3>Praise and Criticism</h3>

<p class="docText">An IDE-based build tool is 
certainly an interesting idea and provides a great deal of productivity 
improvement. However, plenty of developers have never considered using 
an IDE, for a number of reasons. Let’s now examine some of the pros and 
cons of using the Eclipse JDT build tool.</p>



<h4>Praise</h4>

<p class="docText">The praise includes the following:</p>

<ul>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">You don’t need to write a build description file:</span>
 A large part of what makes the Eclipse JDT build system easy to use is 
that you often don’t even know that it exists. Instead of writing a 
text-based build description, as you would for other tools, large parts 
of the build system are automatically constructed. This is all based on 
how you’ve configured your source code directories. When you do need to 
configure the build system, it’s done via a user-friendly GUI.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Compilation is integrated with the full development environment:</span>
 The build process is no longer a separate step but is tightly 
integrated with the overall development environment. As a result, 
Eclipse incrementally compiles source files when they’re saved to disk 
and can provide features such as content assistance and symbol 
cross-referencing.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">A wide range of project types are supported:</span>
 Many languages and programming frameworks have Eclipse plug-in support.
 These plug-ins provide knowledge of how to edit and compile the 
associated source code, as well as how to execute the compiled 
application. If you want to build something such as a web application or
 an Enterprise Java Bean, it’s trivial to create a new project and have 
it compiling in a few minutes.</p>
  </li>
</ul>

<h4>Criticism</h4>

<p class="docText">The criticism includes the following:</p>

<ul>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Eclipse is too complex to use:</span>
 Many developers push back on using Eclipse because of its perceived 
complexity. They feel that there are too many buttons and menus to 
learn, and too many dialog boxes to configure. They’d rather continue 
using <tt>vi</tt> or <tt>emacs</tt> to 
edit their code. Unless the entire development team uses the Eclipse 
IDE, it’s not possible to rely solely on the JDT build tool.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Eclipse requires a lot of CPU power and memory:</span>
 This is certainly true for large projects that contain thousands of 
source files. The problem is most noticeable when Eclipse scans the 
entire source code base to build up the symbol cross-referencing 
database. If a new user chooses to evaluate Eclipse by loading a large 
software project, that user is quite justified in feeling that Eclipse 
is slow.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">The build process is limited:</span> As
 you’ve seen, the Java build tool is limited in capability and can’t do 
much more than create class files for each of the Java source files. If 
you have more complex requirements, use a different build tool.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">You can’t create a repeatable build process:</span>
 Eclipse JDT uses an incremental build system in which files are 
recompiled whenever they’re saved. This ties the build process to the 
developer’s workflow instead of providing a clean end-to-end build 
process. (Although forcing a clean build can somewhat achieve this 
goal.)</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">You can’t see what’s happening in the build process:</span> For people who like to see every compilation command being executed, Eclipse is not an appropriate build tool.</p>
  </li>
</ul>

<h4>Evaluation</h4>

<p class="docText">Let’s evaluate the Eclipse JDT builder against the quality measurements discussed in Chapter 1, “Build System Overview.”</p>

<ul>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Convenience:</span> <span class="docEmphasis">Good</span>:
 Creating a build system in the Eclipse JDT environment is so simple 
that most people don’t even think about. On the downside, it has a 
limited set of features in this area, forcing the use of external build 
tools (such as Ant) for nontrivial builds.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Correctness:</span> <span class="docEmphasis">Excellent</span>:
 Eclipse JDT is intimately familiar with the structure of your Java code
 and knows exactly which parts of the code have changed. Eclipse is 
unlikely to miss a file dependency or recompile a file that wasn’t 
impacted by a change.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Performance:</span> <span class="docEmphasis">Good</span>:
 Eclipse uses a “compile on save” approach in which a Java file (and 
dependent files) is recompiled whenever the file is saved. In this 
respect, the program is immediately available for execution, providing a
 fast build system. The downside is that performing a fresh build of a 
large program doesn’t offer the same performance.</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Scalability:</span> <span class="docEmphasis">Poor</span>:
 Eclipse JDT wasn’t designed to support large build systems, especially 
those with complex requirements. It’s standard practice to delegate to 
other build tools to support larger build systems.</p>
  </li>
</ul>
<p class="docText">The Eclipse environment is 
far more than a build tool and is the ideal environment for a wide range
 of code-development tasks. The build tool within Eclipse JDT is suitable for interactive development but is not suitable for large-scale deployments in which other build tools excel.</p>




</body>
</html>
