<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Similar Build Tools</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
<h3>Similar Build Tools</h3>

<p class="docText">Many software development
 IDEs are available, and developers choose their favorite based on 
usability, supported programming languages, or brand loyalty. Some of 
the simpler IDEs defer to an underlying tool, such as GNU Make or Ant, 
for their build system support. On the other hand, the more advanced 
IDEs are tightly coupled with their compilers and provide integrated 
build support.</p>

<p class="docText">This section looks at the Eclipse C/C++ Development Tooling (CDT) [33] plug-in, which is fairly different from the Eclipse JDT plug-in already discussed.</p>


<h4>CDT for Eclipse, C/C++ Development Tooling</h4>

<p class="docText">This section won’t go into 
exhaustive detail on how Eclipse CDT compiles C and C++ code, but let’s 
look briefly at some of the key differences between CDT and JDT, the 
Java plug-in already discussed.</p>

<p class="docText">Perhaps the most 
noticeable difference is that CDT delegates the work to external tools. 
Unlike Java, which uses byte codes, C and C++ programs are usually 
compiled into machine code, with developers relying on their target 
platform’s native compiler. For example, the CDT compiler in a Linux/x86
 environment defaults to using the GNU C Compiler (GCC) for an Intel x86
 CPU. In addition, CDT defaults to using GNU Make to implement the build
 system.</p>

<p class="docText">The next section discusses the important steps to create and manage a C or C++ project.</p>


<h5>Creating a New C/C++ Project</h5>

<p class="docText">The CDT plug-in enables you 
to create either a C project or a C++ project, depending on what type of
 tool support you need. In both cases, you select a project name, 
specify the type of build artifact you want to create, and choose a 
compiler toolchain to be used by the build system. Finally, you can 
select one or more build configurations.</p>

<p class="docText">When selecting the artifact type, you have a choice of several different variants. You can choose the <tt>Executable</tt> option, which produces an executable program by linking all the object files. Alternatively, you can choose the <tt>Static Library</tt> or <tt>Shared Library</tt>
 option to produce a library archive. As you saw with Java-based 
projects, you can combine a number of these smaller projects into a 
single larger program.</p>

<p class="docText">The
 capability to select a compiler toolchain offers a lot of flexibility 
in compiling code. By default, the project uses the standard compiler 
for the current build machine, such as GCC on Linux. However, if you 
have cross-compilers installed, you can elect to generate object code 
for a different CPU. Even though you’re encouraged to select the 
toolchain when the project is first created, there’s nothing stopping 
you from changing it later.</p>



<h5>Managed Makefiles</h5>

<p class="docText">For the <tt>Executable</tt>, <tt>Static Library</tt>, and <tt>Shared Library</tt>
 project types, CDT creates and manages an underlying makefile system, 
just as you saw with CMake. Whenever a developer adds a new source file 
to the project and selects the <tt>Build Project</tt>
 menu item, CDT autogenerates a corresponding GNU Make build system. The
 exact rules and targets added to the makefile depend on whether you’re 
building an executable program or a library.</p>

<p class="docText">If you’re editing a program 
that already has its own build infrastructure (using GNU Make or any 
other tool), you should instead select the <tt>Makefile project</tt>
 type. In this case, CDT won’t autogenerate the build system; instead, 
it calls upon whichever external build tool you’ve configured for the 
project (by default, this is the <tt>make</tt> command).</p>

<p class="docText">As with JDT, for large
 and complex projects, you’ll almost certainly resort to creating your 
own build system instead of using whatever Eclipse generates for you.</p>



<h5>Build Configurations</h5>

<p class="docText">In a C or C++ project with default settings, all generated files are written into the <tt>Debug</tt> subdirectory. This includes object files, libraries, executable programs, and all the autogenerated build system files.</p>

<p class="docText">In addition to the <tt>Debug</tt> configuration, a project supports a <tt>Release</tt> configuration. As you’d expect, <tt>Debug</tt> generates object files with debugging information enabled, whereas <tt>Release</tt>
 stores the customer-ready version of programs and libraries. The 
generated files for each configuration are placed within their own 
subdirectory, keeping the two variants completely separate.</p>

<p class="docText">Aside from <tt>Debug</tt> and <tt>Release</tt>,
 a developer can create new configurations and are free to customize the
 behavior. This allows the selection of a different compiler toolchain 
(for different target CPUs), the use of preprocessing symbols to modify 
the software’s behavior, and the use of different compiler flags for 
tighter control over the generated object code.</p>

<p class="docText">Developers can switch between configurations as often as they like, making it possible to develop multivariant software.</p>




<h5>Reporting Errors</h5>

<p class="docText">Unlike
 JDT, the compiler isn’t built into the CDT plug-in, so Eclipse relies 
on the output log of the external compiler to identify errors. By using a
 special-purpose parser to extract the compiler’s error messages, the 
source code editor can underline the invalid code with a red line for 
errors or a yellow line for warnings. In addition, any error or warning 
messages are shown in the <tt>Problems</tt> window.</p>

<p class="docText">In most cases, the error and 
warning messages are updated only when the software is compiled, since 
the external compilation tools must first be invoked. On the other hand,
 CDT performs a limited amount of syntax checking while the user is 
typing. Unfortunately, anything more than basic syntax problems can only
 be caught be a real compiler, and won’t be reported until the build 
system is next invoked.</p>



<h5>Content Assistance</h5>

<p class="docText">Finally, it’s worth noting 
that CDT can provide content assistance while a developer edits the 
source code. Instead of using an external compiler, CDT uses a built-in 
indexer tool to scan each of the source files and learn what they 
define. When developers press the <tt>Ctrl-Space</tt>
 key combination, they’re presented with a list of possible variable and
 function names that are defined in the same source file, in a header 
file, or in one of the related source files.</p>





</body>
</html>
