<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 1. Asynchrony: Now &amp; Later</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" class="epub__pagenumrestart" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 1. Asynchrony: Now &amp; Later">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-1-asynchrony-now-later">
<h1><span class="epub__label">Chapter 1. </span>Asynchrony: Now &amp; Later</h1>


<p>One of the most important and yet often misunderstood parts of
programming in a language like JavaScript is how to
express and manipulate program behavior spread out over a period of
time.</p>

<p>This is not just about what happens from the beginning of a <code>for</code> loop
to the end of a <code>for</code> loop, which of course takes some time
(microseconds to milliseconds) to complete. It’s about what happens when
part of your program runs <em>now</em>, and another part of your program runs
<em>later</em>—there’s a gap between <em>now</em> and <em>later</em> where your program
isn’t actively executing.</p>

<p>Practically all nontrivial programs ever written (especially in JS) have
in some way or another had to manage this gap, whether that be in
waiting for user input, requesting data from a database or file system,
sending data across the network and waiting for a response, or
performing a repeated task at a fixed interval of time (like animation).
In all these various ways, your program has to manage state across the
gap in time. As they famously say in London (of the chasm between the
subway door and the platform): “mind the gap.”</p>

<p>In fact, the relationship between the <em>now</em> and <em>later</em> parts of your
program is at the heart of asynchronous programming.</p>

<p>Asynchronous programming has been around since the beginning of JS, for
sure. But most JS developers have never really carefully considered
exactly how and why it crops up in their programs, or explored various
other ways to handle it. The <em>good enough</em> approach has always been
the humble callback function. Many to this day will insist that
callbacks are more than sufficient.</p>

<p>But as JS continues to grow in both scope and complexity, to meet the
ever-widening demands of a first-class programming language that runs in
browsers and servers and every conceivable device in between, the pains
by which we manage asynchrony are becoming increasingly crippling, and
they cry out for approaches that are both more capable and more
reason-able.</p>

<p>While this all may seem rather abstract right now, I assure you we’ll
tackle it more completely and concretely as we go on through this book.
We’ll explore a variety of emerging techniques for async JavaScript
programming over the next several chapters.</p>

<p>But before we can get there, we’re going to have to understand much more
deeply what asynchrony is and how it operates in JS.</p>


































































































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
