<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>A Program in Chunks</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" class="epub__pagenumrestart" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 1. Asynchrony: Now &amp; Later">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-1-asynchrony-now-later">
























<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="A Program in Chunks"><div class="epub__sect1" id="a-program-in-chunks">
<h1>A Program in Chunks</h1>

<p>You may write your JS program in one <em>.js</em> file, but your program is
almost certainly comprised of several chunks, only one of which is going
to execute <em>now</em>, and the rest of which will execute <em>later</em>. The most
common unit of each <em>chunk</em> is the <code>function</code>.</p>

<p>The problem most developers new to JS seem to have is that <em>later</em>
doesn’t happen strictly and immediately after <em>now</em>. In other words,
tasks that cannot complete <em>now</em> are, by definition, going to complete
asynchronously, and thus we will not have blocking behavior as you might
intuitively expect or want.</p>

<p>Consider:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__c1">// ajax(..) is some arbitrary Ajax function given by a library</code>
<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">data</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">ajax</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"http://some.url.1"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">data</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__c1">// Oops! `data` generally won't have the Ajax results</code></pre>

<p>You’re probably aware that standard Ajax requests don’t complete
synchronously, which means the <code>ajax(..)</code> function does not yet have any
value to return back to be assigned to the <code>data</code> variable. If <code>ajax(..)</code>
could block until the response came back, then the <code>data = ..</code>
assignment would work fine.</p>

<p>But that’s not how we do Ajax. We make an asynchronous Ajax request
<em>now</em>, and we won’t get the results back until <em>later</em>.</p>

<p>The simplest (but definitely not only, or necessarily even best!) way of
“waiting” from <em>now</em> until <em>later</em> is to use a function, commonly called
a <em>callback function</em>:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__c1">// ajax(..) is some arbitrary Ajax function given by a library</code>
<code class="epub__nx">ajax</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"http://some.url.1"</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">myCallbackFunction</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">data</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>

    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">data</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// Yay, I gots me some `data`!</code>

<code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>
<div data-type="warning" epub:type="warning"><h6>Warning</h6>
<p>You may have heard that it’s possible to make synchronous Ajax
requests. While that’s technically true, you should never, ever do it,
under any circumstances, because it locks the browser UI (buttons,
menus, scrolling, etc.) and prevents any user interaction whatsoever.
This is a terrible idea, and should always be avoided.</p>
</div>

<p>Before you protest in disagreement, no, your desire to avoid the mess of
callbacks is not justification for blocking, synchronous Ajax.</p>

<p>For example, consider this code:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">now</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__k">return</code> <code class="epub__mi">21</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">later</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">answer</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">answer</code> <code class="epub__o">*</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"Meaning of life:"</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__nx">answer</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">answer</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">now</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>

<code class="epub__nx">setTimeout</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">later</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__mi">1000</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// Meaning of life: 42</code></pre>

<p>There are two chunks to this program: the stuff that will run <em>now</em>, and
the stuff that will run <em>later</em>. It should be fairly obvious what those
two chunks are, but let’s be super explicit:</p>

<p>Now:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">now</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__k">return</code> <code class="epub__mi">21</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">later</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code> <code class="epub__p">..</code> <code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">answer</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">now</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>

<code class="epub__nx">setTimeout</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">later</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__mi">1000</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>

<p>Later:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__nx">answer</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">answer</code> <code class="epub__o">*</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"Meaning of life:"</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__nx">answer</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>

<p>The <em>now</em> chunk runs right away, as soon as you execute your program.
But <code>setTimeout(..)</code> also sets up an event (a timeout) to happen
<em>later</em>, so the contents of the <code>later()</code> function will be executed at a
later time (1,000 milliseconds from now).</p>

<p>Any time you wrap a portion of code into a <code>function</code> and specify that
it should be executed in response to some event (timer, mouse click,
Ajax response, etc.), you are creating a <em>later</em> chunk of your code, and
thus introducing asynchrony to your program.</p>








<section data-type="sect2" data-pdf-bookmark="Async Console"><div class="epub__sect2" id="async-console">
<h2>Async Console</h2>

<p>There is no specification or set of requirements around how the
<span class="epub__keep-together"><code>console.*</code></span> methods work—they are not officially part of JavaScript,
but are instead added to JS by the <em>hosting environment</em> (see the <em>Types &amp; Grammar</em> title of this series).</p>

<p>So, different browsers and JS environments do as they please, which can
sometimes lead to confusing behavior.</p>

<p>In particular, there are some browsers and some conditions that
<span class="epub__keep-together"><code>console.log(..)</code></span> does not actually immediately output what it’s given.
The main reason this may happen is because I/O is a very slow and
blocking part of many programs (not just JS). So, it may perform better
(from the page/UI perspective) for a browser to handle <code>console</code> I/O
asynchronously in the background, without you perhaps even knowing that
occurred.</p>

<p class="epub__pagebreak-after">A not terribly common, but possible, scenario where this could be
<em>observable</em> (not from code itself but from the outside):</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">index</code><code class="epub__o">:</code> <code class="epub__mi">1</code>
<code class="epub__p">};</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// later</code>
<code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// ??</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// even later</code>
<code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">index</code><code class="epub__o">++</code><code class="epub__p">;</code></pre>

<p>We’d normally expect to see the <code>a</code> object be snapshotted at the exact
moment of the <code>console.log(..)</code> statement, printing something like
<code>{ index: 1 }</code>, such that in the next statement when <code>a.index++</code> happens,
it’s modifying something different than, or just strictly after, the
output of <code>a</code>.</p>

<p>Most of the time, the preceding code will probably produce an object
representation in your developer tools’ console that’s what you’d
expect. But it’s possible this same code could run in a situation where
the browser felt it needed to defer the console I/O to the background,
in which case it’s possible that by the time the object is represented
in the browser console, the <code>a.index++</code> has already happened, and it
shows <code>{ index: 2 }</code>.</p>

<p>It’s a moving target under what conditions exactly <code>console</code> I/O will be
deferred, or even whether it will be observable. Just be aware of this
possible asynchronicity in I/O in case you ever run into <span class="epub__keep-together">issues in</span>
debugging where objects have been modified <em>after</em> a <span class="epub__keep-together"><code>console.log(..)</code></span>
statement and yet you see the unexpected modifications show up.</p>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>If you run into this rare scenario, the best option is to use
breakpoints in your JS debugger instead of relying on <code>console</code> output.
The next best option would be to force a “snapshot” of the object in
question by serializing it to a <code>string</code>, like with
<code>JSON.stringify(..)</code>.</p>
</div>
</div></section>





</div></section>



























































































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
