<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Event Loop</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" class="epub__pagenumrestart" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 1. Asynchrony: Now &amp; Later">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-1-asynchrony-now-later">






































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Event Loop"><div class="epub__sect1" id="event-loop">
<h1>Event Loop</h1>

<p>Let’s make a (perhaps shocking) claim: despite your clearly being able
to write asynchronous JS code (like the timeout we just looked at), up
until recently (ES6), JavaScript itself has actually never had any
direct notion of asynchrony built into it.</p>

<p>What!? That seems like a crazy claim, right? In fact, it’s quite true.
The JS engine itself has never done anything more than execute a single
chunk of your program at any given moment, when asked to.</p>

<p>“Asked to.” By whom? That’s the important part!</p>

<p>The JS engine doesn’t run in isolation. It runs inside a <em>hosting
environment</em>, which is for most developers the typical web browser. Over
the last several years (but by no means exclusively), JS has expanded
beyond the browser into other environments, such as servers, via things
like Node.js. In fact, JavaScript gets embedded into all kinds of
devices these days, from robots to lightbulbs.</p>

<p>But the one common “thread” (that’s a not-so-subtle asynchronous joke,
for what it’s worth) of all these environments is that they have a
mechanism in them that handles executing multiple chunks of your program
<em>over time</em>, at each moment invoking the JS engine, called the <em>event loop</em>.</p>

<p>In other words, the JS engine has had no innate sense of time, but has
instead been an on-demand execution environment for any arbitrary
snippet of JS. It’s the surrounding environment that has always
<em>scheduled</em> “events” (JS code executions).</p>

<p>So, for example, when your JS program makes an Ajax request to fetch
some data from a server, you set up the response code in a function
(commonly called a <em>callback</em>), and the JS engine tells the hosting
environment, “Hey, I’m going to suspend execution for now, but whenever
you finish with that network request, and you have some data, please
call this function back.”</p>

<p>The browser is then set up to listen for the response from the network,
and when it has something to give you, it schedules the callback
function to be executed by inserting it into the event loop.</p>

<p>So what is the event loop?</p>

<p>Let’s conceptualize it first through some fake-ish code:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__c1">// `eventLoop` is an array that acts as a queue</code>
<code class="epub__c1">// (first-in, first-out)</code>
<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">eventLoop</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__p">[</code> <code class="epub__p">];</code>
<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">event</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// keep going "forever"</code>
<code class="epub__k">while</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__kc">true</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// perform a "tick"</code>
    <code class="epub__k">if</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">eventLoop</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">length</code> <code class="epub__o">&gt;</code> <code class="epub__mi">0</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
        <code class="epub__c1">// get the next event in the queue</code>
        <code class="epub__nx">event</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">eventLoop</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">shift</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>

        <code class="epub__c1">// now, execute the next event</code>
        <code class="epub__k">try</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
            <code class="epub__nx">event</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>
        <code class="epub__p">}</code>
        <code class="epub__k">catch</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">err</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
            <code class="epub__nx">reportError</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">err</code><code class="epub__p">);</code>
        <code class="epub__p">}</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code></pre>

<p>This is, of course, vastly simplified pseudocode to illustrate the
concepts. But it should be enough to help get a better understanding.</p>

<p>As you can see, there’s a continuously running loop represented by the
<code>while</code> loop, and each iteration of this loop is called a <em>tick</em>. For
each tick, if an event is waiting on the queue, it’s taken off and
executed. These events are your function callbacks.</p>

<p>It’s important to note that <code>setTimeout(..)</code> doesn’t put your callback
on the event loop queue. What it does is set up a timer; when the timer
expires, the environment places your callback into the event loop, such
that some future tick will pick it up and execute it.</p>

<p>What if there are already 20 items in the event loop at that moment?
Your callback waits. It gets in line behind the others—there’s not
normally a path for preempting the queue and skipping ahead in line.
This explains why <code>setTimeout(..)</code> timers may not fire with perfect
temporal accuracy. You’re guaranteed (roughly speaking) that your
callback won’t fire <em>before</em> the time interval you specify, but it can
happen at or after that time, depending on the state of the event queue.</p>

<p>So, in other words, your program is generally broken up into lots of
small chunks, which happen one after the other in the event loop queue.
And technically, other events not related directly to your program can
be interleaved within the queue as well.</p>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>We mentioned “up until recently” in relation to ES6 changing the
nature of where the event loop queue is managed. It’s mostly a formal
technicality, but ES6 now specifies exactly how the event loop works,
which means technically it’s within the purview of the JS engine, rather
than just the hosting environment. One main reason for this change is
the introduction of ES6 Promises, which we’ll discuss in Chapter 3,
because they require the ability to have direct, fine-grained control
over scheduling operations on the event loop queue (see the discussion
of <code>setTimeout(..0)</code> in “Cooperation”).</p>
</div>
</div></section>













































































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
