<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Concurrency</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" class="epub__pagenumrestart" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 1. Asynchrony: Now &amp; Later">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-1-asynchrony-now-later">


































































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Concurrency"><div class="epub__sect1" id="concurrency">
<h1>Concurrency</h1>

<p>Let’s imagine a site that displays a list of status updates (like a
social network news feed) that progressively loads as the user scrolls
down the list. To make such a feature work correctly, (at least) two
separate “processes” will need to be executing <em>simultaneously</em> (i.e.,
during the same window of time, but not necessarily at the same
instant).</p>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>We’re using “process” in quotes here because they aren’t true
operating system–level processes in the computer science sense. They’re
virtual processes, or tasks, that represent a logically connected,
sequential series of operations. We’ll use “process” instead of
“task” because terminology-wise, it matches the definitions of the
concepts we’re exploring.</p>
</div>

<p>The first “process” will respond to <code>onscroll</code> events (making Ajax
requests for new content) as they fire when the user has scrolled the
page further down. The second “process” will receive Ajax responses back
(to render content onto the page).</p>

<p>Obviously, if a user scrolls fast enough, you may see two or more
<code>onscroll</code> events fired during the time it takes to get the first
response back and process, and thus you’re going to have <code>onscroll</code>
events and Ajax response events firing rapidly, interleaved with each
other.</p>

<p>Concurrency is when two or more “processes” are executing simultaneously
over the same period, regardless of whether their individual constituent
operations happen <em>in parallel</em> (at the same instant on separate
processors or cores). You can think of concurrency then as
“process”-level (or task-level) parallelism, as opposed to
operation-level parallelism (separate-processor threads).</p>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>Concurrency also introduces an optional notion of these
“processes” interacting with each other. We’ll come back to that later.</p>
</div>

<p>For a given window of time (a few seconds worth of a user scrolling),
let’s visualize each independent “process” as a series of
events/operations:</p>

<p>“Process” 1 (<code>onscroll</code> events):</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting">onscroll, request 1
onscroll, request 2
onscroll, request 3
onscroll, request 4
onscroll, request 5
onscroll, request 6
onscroll, request 7</pre>

<p>“Process” 2 (Ajax response events):</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting">response 1
response 2
response 3
response 4
response 5
response 6
response 7</pre>

<p>It’s quite possible that an <code>onscroll</code> event and an Ajax response event
could be ready to be processed at exactly the same <em>moment</em>. For example,
let’s visualize these events in a timeline:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting">onscroll, request 1
onscroll, request 2          response 1
onscroll, request 3          response 2
response 3
onscroll, request 4
onscroll, request 5
onscroll, request 6          response 4
onscroll, request 7
response 6
response 5
response 7</pre>

<p>But, going back to our notion of the event loop from earlier in the
chapter, JS can handle only one event at a time, so
either <code>onscroll, request 2</code> is going to happen first or <code>response 1</code> is
going to happen first, but they cannot happen at literally the same
moment. Just like kids at a school cafeteria, no matter what crowd they
form outside the doors, they’ll have to merge into a single line to get
their lunch!</p>

<p>Let’s visualize the interleaving of all these events onto the event loop
queue:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting">onscroll, request 1   &lt;--- Process 1 starts
onscroll, request 2
response 1            &lt;--- Process 2 starts
onscroll, request 3
response 2
response 3
onscroll, request 4
onscroll, request 5
onscroll, request 6
response 4
onscroll, request 7   &lt;--- Process 1 finishes
response 6
response 5
response 7            &lt;--- Process 2 finishes</pre>

<p>“Process” 1 and “Process” 2 run concurrently (task-level parallel), but
their individual events run sequentially on the event loop queue.</p>

<p>By the way, notice how <code>response 6</code> and <code>response 5</code> came back out of
expected order?</p>

<p>The single-threaded event loop is one expression of concurrency (there
are certainly others, which we’ll come back to later).</p>










































</div></section>

















































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
