<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Jobs</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" class="epub__pagenumrestart" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 1. Asynchrony: Now &amp; Later">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-1-asynchrony-now-later">
















































































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Jobs"><div class="epub__sect1" id="jobs">
<h1>Jobs</h1>

<p>As of ES6, there’s a new concept layered on top of the event loop queue,
called the <em>Job queue</em>. The most likely exposure you’ll have to it is
with the asynchronous behavior of Promises (see Chapter 3).</p>

<p>Unfortunately, at the moment it’s a mechanism without an exposed API,
and thus demonstrating it is a bit more convoluted. So we’re going to describe it conceptually, such that when we discuss async
behavior with Promises in Chapter 3, you’ll understand how those actions
are being scheduled and processed.</p>

<p>So, the best way to think about this that I’ve found is that the Job
queue is a queue hanging off the end of every tick in the event loop
queue. Certain async-implied actions that may occur during a tick of the
event loop will not cause a whole new event to be added to the event
loop queue, but will instead add an item (aka Job) to the end of the
current tick’s Job queue.</p>

<p>It’s kinda like saying, “oh, here’s this other thing I need to do
<em>later</em>, but make sure it happens right away before anything else can
happen.”</p>

<p>The event loop queue is like an amusement park
ride: once you finish the ride, you have to go to the back of the
line to ride again. But the Job queue is like finishing the ride, cutting in line, and getting right back on.</p>

<p>A Job can also cause more Jobs to be added to the end of the same queue.
So, it’s theoretically possible that a <em>Job loop</em> (a Job that keeps
adding another Job, etc.) could spin indefinitely, thus starving the
program of the ability to move on to the next event loop tick. This
would conceptually be almost the same as just expressing a long-running
or infinite loop (like <code>while (true) ..</code>) in your code.</p>

<p>Jobs are kind of like the spirit of the <code>setTimeout(..0)</code> hack, but
implemented in such a way as to have a much more well-defined and
guaranteed ordering: later, but as soon as possible.</p>

<p>Let’s imagine an API for scheduling Jobs
(directly, without hacks), and call it <code>schedule(..)</code>.
Consider:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"A"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__nx">setTimeout</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(){</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"B"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">},</code> <code class="epub__mi">0</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// theoretical "Job API"</code>
<code class="epub__nx">schedule</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(){</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"C"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

    <code class="epub__nx">schedule</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(){</code>
        <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"D"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>

<p>You might expect this to print out <code>A B C D</code>, but instead it would print
out <code>A C D B</code>, because the Jobs happen at the end of the current event
loop tick, and the timer fires to schedule for the <em>next</em> event loop
tick (if available!).</p>

<p>In Chapter 3, we’ll see that the asynchronous behavior of Promises is
based on Jobs, so it’s important to keep clear how that relates to event
loop behavior.</p>
</div></section>



































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
