<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Review</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" class="epub__pagenumrestart" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 1. Asynchrony: Now &amp; Later">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-1-asynchrony-now-later">












































































































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Review"><div class="epub__sect1" id="review_ch01">
<h1>Review</h1>

<p>A JavaScript program is (practically) always broken up into two or more
chunks, where the first chunk runs <em>now</em> and the next chunk runs
<em>later</em>, in response to an event. Even though the program is executed
chunk-by-chunk, all of them share the same access to the <span class="epub__keep-together">program scope</span>
and state, so each modification to state is made on top of the previous
state.</p>

<p>Whenever there are events to run, the event loop runs until the queue
is empty. Each iteration of the event loop is a tick. User
interaction, IO, and timers enqueue events on the event queue.</p>

<p>At any given moment, only one event can be processed from the queue at a
time. While an event is executing, it can directly or indirectly cause
one or more subsequent events.</p>

<p>Concurrency is when two or more chains of events interleave over time,
such that from a high-level perspective, they appear to be running
simultaneously (even though at any given moment only one event is
being processed).</p>

<p>It’s often necessary to do some form of interaction coordination between
these concurrent “processes” (as distinct from operating system
processes), for instance to ensure ordering or to prevent race
conditions. These “processes” can also cooperate by breaking
themselves into smaller chunks and to allow other “process”
interleaving.</p>
</div></section>







</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
