<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 2. Callbacks</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 2. Callbacks">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-2-callbacks">
<h1><span class="epub__label">Chapter 2. </span>Callbacks</h1>


<p>In Chapter 1, we explored the terminology and concepts around
asynchronous programming in JavaScript. Our focus is on understanding
the single-threaded (one-at-a-time) event loop queue that drives all
<em>events</em> (async function invocations). We also explored various ways
that concurrency patterns explain the relationships (if any!) between
simultaneously running chains of events, or “processes” (tasks,
function calls, etc.).</p>

<p>All our examples in Chapter 1 used the function as the individual,
indivisible unit of operations, whereby inside the function, statements
run in predictable order (above the compiler level!), but at the
function-ordering level, events (aka async function invocations) can
happen in a variety of orders.</p>

<p>In all these cases, the function is acting as a <em>callback</em>, because it
serves as the target for the event loop to “call back into” the program,
whenever that item in the queue is processed.</p>

<p>As you no doubt have observed, callbacks are by far the most common way
that asynchrony in JS programs is expressed and managed. Indeed, the
callback is the most fundamental async pattern in the language.</p>

<p>Countless JS programs, even very sophisticated and complex ones, have
been written upon no other async foundation than the callback (with, of
course, the concurrency interaction patterns we explored in Chapter 1).
The callback function is the async workhorse for JavaScript, and it
does its job respectably.</p>

<p>Except…callbacks are not without their shortcomings. Many developers
are excited by the <em>promise</em> (pun intended!) of better async patterns.
But it’s impossible to effectively use any abstraction if you don’t
understand what it’s abstracting, and why.</p>

<p>In this chapter, we will explore a couple of those in depth, as
motivation for why more sophisticated async patterns (explored in
subsequent chapters of this book and Appendix B) are necessary and desired.</p>






































































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
