<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Continuations</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 2. Callbacks">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-2-callbacks">






















<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Continuations"><div class="epub__sect1" id="continuations">
<h1>Continuations</h1>

<p>Let’s go back to the async callback example we started with in Chapter 1, but let me slightly modify it to illustrate a point:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__c1">// A</code>
<code class="epub__nx">ajax</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">".."</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(..){</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// C</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__c1">// B</code></pre>

<p><code>// A</code> and <code>// B</code> represent the first half of the program (aka the
<em>now</em>), and <code>// C</code> marks the second half of the program (aka the
<em>later</em>). The first half executes right away, and then there’s a pause
of indeterminate length. At some future moment, if the Ajax call
completes, then the program will pick up where it left off, and
continue with the second half.</p>

<p>In other words, the callback function wraps or encapsulates the
continuation of the program.</p>

<p>Let’s make the code even simpler:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__c1">// A</code>
<code class="epub__nx">setTimeout</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(){</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// C</code>
<code class="epub__p">},</code> <code class="epub__mi">1000</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__c1">// B</code></pre>

<p>Stop for a moment and ask yourself how you’d describe (to someone else
less informed about how JS works) the way that program behaves. Go
ahead, try it out loud. It’s a good exercise that will help my next
points make more sense.</p>

<p>Most readers just now probably thought or said something to the effect
of: “Do A, then set up a timeout to wait 1,000 milliseconds, then once
that fires, do C.” How close was your rendition?</p>

<p>You might have caught yourself and self-edited to: “Do A, set up the
timeout for 1,000 milliseconds, then do B, then after the timeout fires,
do C.” That’s more accurate than the first version. Can you spot the
difference?</p>

<p>Even though the second version is more accurate, both versions are
deficient in explaining this code in a way that matches our brains to
the code, and the code to the JS engine. The disconnect is both subtle
and monumental, and is at the very heart of understanding the
shortcomings of callbacks as async expression and management.</p>

<p>As soon as we introduce a single continuation (or several dozen, as many
programs do!) in the form of a callback function, we have allowed a
divergence to form between how our brains work and the way the code
will operate. Any time these two diverge (and this is by far not the
only place that happens, as I’m sure you know!), we run into the
inevitable fact that our code becomes harder to understand, reason
about, debug, and maintain.</p>
</div></section>































































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
