<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Sequential Brain</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 2. Callbacks">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-2-callbacks">




































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Sequential Brain"><div class="epub__sect1" id="sequential-brain">
<h1>Sequential Brain</h1>

<p>I’m pretty sure most of you have heard someone say, or made
the claim yourself: “I’m a multitasker.” The effects of trying to act
as a multitasker range from humorous (e.g., the silly
patting-head-rubbing-stomach kids’ game) to mundane (chewing gum while
walking) to downright dangerous (texting while driving).</p>

<p>But are we multitaskers? Can we really do two conscious, intentional
actions at once and think/reason about both of them at exactly the same
moment? Does our highest level of brain functionality have parallel
multithreading going on?</p>

<p>The answer may surprise you: probably not.</p>

<p>That’s just not really how our brains appear to be set up. We’re much
more single taskers than many of us (especially A-type personalities!)
would like to admit. We can really only think about one thing at any
given instant.</p>

<p>I’m not talking about all our involuntary, subconscious, automatic brain
functions, such as heart beating, breathing, and eyelid blinking. Those
are all vital tasks to our sustained life, but we don’t intentionally
allocate any brain power to them. Thankfully, while we obsess about
checking social network feeds for the 15th time in three minutes, our
brain carries on in the background (threads!) with all those important
tasks.</p>

<p>We’re instead talking about whatever task is at the forefront of our
minds at the moment. For me, it’s writing the text in this book right
now. Am I doing any other higher level brain function at exactly this
same moment? Nope, not really. I get distracted quickly and easily—a
few dozen times in these last couple of paragraphs!</p>

<p>When we fake multitasking, such as trying to type something at the
same time we’re talking to a friend or family member on the phone, what
we’re actually most likely doing is acting as fast context switchers. In
other words, we switch back and forth between two or more tasks in rapid
succession, simultaneously progressing on each task in tiny, fast
little chunks. We do it so fast that to the outside world it appears as
if we’re doing these things in parallel.</p>

<p>Does that sound suspiciously like async evented concurrency (like the
sort that happens in JS) to you?! If not, go back and read Chapter 1
again!</p>

<p>In fact, one way of simplifying (i.e., abusing) the massively complex
world of neurology into something I can remotely hope to discuss here is
that our brains work kinda like the event loop queue.</p>

<p>If you think about every single letter (or word) I type as a single
async event, in just this sentence alone there are several dozen
opportunities for my brain to be interrupted by some other event, such
as from my senses, or even just my random thoughts.</p>

<p>I don’t get interrupted and pulled to another “process” at every
opportunity that I could be (thankfully—or this book would never be
written!). But it happens often enough that I feel my own brain is
nearly constantly switching to various different contexts (aka
“processes”). And that’s an awful lot like how the JS engine would
probably feel.</p>




























</div></section>

















































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
