<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Doing Versus Planning</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 2. Callbacks">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-2-callbacks">




































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Sequential Brain"><div class="epub__sect1" id="sequential-brain">































<section data-type="sect2" data-pdf-bookmark="Doing Versus Planning"><div class="epub__sect2" id="doing-versus-planning">
<h2>Doing Versus Planning</h2>

<p>OK, so our brains can be thought of as operating in single-threaded
event loop queue like ways, as can the JS engine. That sounds like a good
match.</p>

<p>But we need to be more nuanced than that in our analysis. There’s a big,
observable difference between how we plan various tasks, and how our
brains actually perform those tasks.</p>

<p>Again, back to the writing of this text as my metaphor. My rough mental
outline plan here is to keep writing and writing, going sequentially
through a set of points I have ordered in my thoughts. I don’t plan to
have any interruptions or nonlinear activity in this writing. But yet,
my brain is nevertheless switching around all the time.</p>

<p>Even though at an operational level our brains are async evented, we
seem to plan out tasks in a sequential, synchronous way. “I need to go
to the store, then buy some milk, then drop off my dry cleaning.”</p>

<p>You’ll notice that this higher level thinking (planning) doesn’t seem
very async evented in its formulation. In fact, it’s kind of rare for us
to deliberately think solely in terms of events. Instead, we plan things
out carefully, sequentially (A, then B, then C), and we assume to an
extent a sort of temporal blocking that forces B to wait on A, and C to
wait on B.</p>

<p>When a developer writes code, they are planning out a set of actions to
occur. If they’re any good at being a developer, they’re carefully
planning it out. “I need to set <code>z</code> to the value of <code>x</code>, and then <code>x</code>
to the value of <code>y</code>,” and so forth.</p>

<p>When we write out synchronous code, statement by statement, it works a
lot like our errands to-do list:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__c1">// swap `x` and `y` (via temp variable `z`)</code>
<code class="epub__nx">z</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">x</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__nx">x</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">y</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__nx">y</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">z</code><code class="epub__p">;</code></pre>

<p>These three assignment statements are synchronous, so <code>x = y</code> waits for
<code>z = x</code> to finish, and <code>y = z</code> in turn waits for <code>x = y</code> to finish.
Another way of saying it is that these three statements are
temporally bound to execute in a certain order, one right after the
other. Thankfully, we don’t need to be bothered with any async evented
details here. If we did, the code gets a lot more complex, quickly!</p>

<p>So if synchronous brain planning maps well to synchronous code
statements, how well do our brains do at planning out asynchronous code?</p>

<p>It turns out that how we express asynchrony (with callbacks) in our code
doesn’t map very well at all to that synchronous brain planning
behavior.</p>

<p>Can you actually imagine having a line of thinking that plans out your
to-do errands like this?</p>
<blockquote>
<p>“I need to go to the store, but on the way I’m sure I’ll get a phone
call, so <em>Hi, Mom</em>, and while she starts talking, I’ll be looking up the
store address on GPS, but that’ll take a second to load, so I’ll turn
down the radio so I can hear Mom better, then I’ll realize I forgot to
put on a jacket and it’s cold outside, but no matter, keep driving and
talking to Mom, and then the seatbelt ding reminds me to buckle up, so
<em>yes, Mom, I am wearing my seatbelt, I always do!</em> Ah, finally the GPS
got the directions, now…”</p></blockquote>

<p>As ridiculous as that sounds as a formulation for how we plan our day
out and think about what to do and in what order, nonetheless it’s
exactly how our brains operate at a functional level. Remember, that’s
not multitasking, it’s just fast context switching.</p>

<p>The reason it’s difficult for us as developers to write async evented
code, especially when all we have is the callback to do it, is that
stream of consciousness thinking/planning is unnatural for most of us.</p>

<p>We think in step-by-step terms, but the tools (callbacks) available to
us in code are not expressed in a step-by-step fashion once we move from
synchronous to asynchronous.</p>

<p>And <em>that</em> is why it’s so hard to accurately author and reason about
async JS code with callbacks: because it’s not how our brain planning
works.</p>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>The only thing worse than not knowing why some code breaks is
not knowing why it worked in the first place! It’s the classic “house of
cards” mentality: “it works, but I’m not sure why, so nobody touch it!” You
may have heard, “Hell is other people” (Sartre), and the programmer meme
twist, “Hell is other people’s code.” I believe truly: “Hell is not
understanding my own code.” And callbacks are one main culprit.</p>
</div>
</div></section>



















</div></section>

















































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
