<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Nested/Chained Callbacks</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 2. Callbacks">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-2-callbacks">




































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Sequential Brain"><div class="epub__sect1" id="sequential-brain">













































<section data-type="sect2" data-pdf-bookmark="Nested/Chained Callbacks"><div class="epub__sect2" id="nestedchained-callbacks">
<h2>Nested/Chained Callbacks</h2>

<p>Consider:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__nx">listen</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"click"</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">handler</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">evt</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">setTimeout</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">request</code><code class="epub__p">(){</code>
        <code class="epub__nx">ajax</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"http://some.url.1"</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">response</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">text</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
            <code class="epub__k">if</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">text</code> <code class="epub__o">==</code> <code class="epub__s2">"hello"</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
                <code class="epub__nx">handler</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>
            <code class="epub__p">}</code>
            <code class="epub__k">else</code> <code class="epub__k">if</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">text</code> <code class="epub__o">==</code> <code class="epub__s2">"world"</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
                <code class="epub__nx">request</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>
            <code class="epub__p">}</code>
        <code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
    <code class="epub__p">},</code> <code class="epub__mi">500</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>

<p>There’s a good chance code like that is recognizable to you. We’ve got a
chain of three functions nested together, each one representing a step
in an asynchronous series (task, “process”).</p>

<p>This kind of code is often called <em>callback hell</em>, and sometimes also
referred to as the <em>pyramid of doom</em> (for its sideways-facing triangular
shape due to the nested indentation).</p>

<p>But callback hell actually has almost nothing to do with the
nesting/indentation. It’s a far deeper problem than that. We’ll see how
and why as we continue through the rest of this chapter.</p>

<p>First, we’re waiting for the <code>click</code> event, then we’re waiting for the
timer to fire, then we’re waiting for the Ajax response to come back, at
which point it might do it all again.</p>

<p>At first glance, this code may seem to map its asynchrony naturally to
sequential brain planning.</p>

<p>First (<em>now</em>), we:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__nx">listen</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">".."</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">handler</code><code class="epub__p">(..){</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// ..</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>

<p>Then <em>later</em>, we:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__nx">setTimeout</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">request</code><code class="epub__p">(..){</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// ..</code>
<code class="epub__p">},</code> <code class="epub__mi">500</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">;</code></pre>

<p class="epub__pagebreak-before">Then still <em>later</em>, we:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__nx">ajax</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">".."</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">response</code><code class="epub__p">(..){</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// ..</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>

<p>And finally (most <em>later</em>), we:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__k">if</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__p">..</code> <code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// ..</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>
<code class="epub__k">else</code> <code class="epub__p">..</code></pre>

<p>But there’s several problems with reasoning about this code linearly in
such a fashion.</p>

<p>First, it’s an accident of the example that our steps are on subsequent
lines (1, 2, 3, and 4…). In real async JS programs, there’s often a
lot more noise cluttering things up, noise that we have to deftly
maneuver past in our brains as we jump from one function to the next.
Understanding the async flow in such callback-laden code is not
impossible, but it’s certainly not natural or easy, even with lots of
practice.</p>

<p>But also, there’s something deeper wrong, which isn’t evident just in
that code example. Let me make up another scenario (pseudocode-ish) to
illustrate it:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__nx">doA</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(){</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">doB</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>

    <code class="epub__nx">doC</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(){</code>
        <code class="epub__nx">doD</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">)</code>

    <code class="epub__nx">doE</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__nx">doF</code><code class="epub__p">();</code></pre>

<p>While the experienced among you will correctly identify the true order
of operations here, I’m betting it is more than a little confusing at
first glance, and takes some concerted mental cycles to arrive at. The
operations will happen in this order:</p>

<ul>
<li>
<p><code>doA()</code></p>
</li>
<li>
<p><code>doF()</code></p>
</li>
<li>
<p><code>doB()</code></p>
</li>
<li>
<p><code>doC()</code></p>
</li>
<li>
<p><code>doE()</code></p>
</li>
<li>
<p><code>doD()</code></p>
</li>
</ul>

<p>Did you get that right the very first time you glanced at the code?</p>

<p>OK, some of you are thinking I was unfair in my function naming, to
intentionally lead you astray. I swear I was just naming in top-down
appearance order. But let me try again:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__nx">doA</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(){</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">doC</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>

    <code class="epub__nx">doD</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(){</code>
        <code class="epub__nx">doF</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">)</code>

    <code class="epub__nx">doE</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__nx">doB</code><code class="epub__p">();</code></pre>

<p>Now, I’ve named them alphabetically in order of actual execution. But I
still bet, even with experience now in this scenario, tracing through
the <code>A</code> → <code>B</code> → <code>C</code> → <code>D</code> → <code>E</code> → <code>F</code> order doesn’t come naturally. Certainly your eyes do an awful lot of jumping up
and down the code snippet, right?</p>

<p>But even if that all comes naturally to you, there’s still one more hazard
that could wreak havoc. Can you spot what it is?</p>

<p>What if <code>doA(..)</code> or <code>doD(..)</code> aren’t actually async, the way we
obviously assumed them to be? Uh-oh, now the order is different. If
they’re both in sync (and maybe only sometimes, depending on the conditions
of the program at the time), the order is now
<code>A</code> → <code>C</code> → <code>D</code> → <code>F</code> → <code>E</code> → <code>B</code>.</p>

<p>That sound you just heard faintly in the background is the sighs of
thousands of JS developers who just had a face-in-hands moment.</p>

<p>Is nesting the problem? Is that what makes it so hard to trace the async
flow? That’s part of it, certainly.</p>

<p>But let me rewrite the previous nested event/timeout/Ajax example
without using nesting:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__nx">listen</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"click"</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__nx">handler</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">handler</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">setTimeout</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">request</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__mi">500</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">request</code><code class="epub__p">(){</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">ajax</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"http://some.url.1"</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__nx">response</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">response</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">text</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
    <code class="epub__k">if</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">text</code> <code class="epub__o">==</code> <code class="epub__s2">"hello"</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
        <code class="epub__nx">handler</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code>
    <code class="epub__k">else</code> <code class="epub__k">if</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">text</code> <code class="epub__o">==</code> <code class="epub__s2">"world"</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
        <code class="epub__nx">request</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code></pre>

<p>This formulation of the code is not hardly as recognizable as having the
nesting/indentation woes of its previous form, and yet it’s every bit as
susceptible to callback hell. Why?</p>

<p>As we go to linearly (sequentially) reason about this code, we have to
skip from one function, to the next, to the next, and bounce all around
the code base to “see” the sequence flow. And remember, this is
simplified code in sort of best-case fashion. We all know that real
async JS program code bases are often fantastically more jumbled, which
makes such reasoning orders of magnitude more difficult.</p>

<p>Another thing to notice: to get steps 2, 3, and 4 linked together so
they happen in succession, the only affordance callbacks alone gives us
is to hardcode step 2 into step 1, step 3 into step 2, step 4 into step
3, and so on. The hardcoding isn’t necessarily a bad thing, if it really
is a fixed condition that step 2 should always lead to step 3.</p>

<p>But the hardcoding definitely makes the code a bit more brittle, as it
doesn’t account for anything going wrong that might cause a deviation in
the progression of steps. For example, if step 2 fails, step 3 never
gets reached, nor does step 2 retry, or move to an alternate error
handling flow, and so on.</p>

<p>All of these issues are things you can manually hardcode into each
step, but that code is often very repetitive and not reusable in other
steps or in other async flows in your program.</p>

<p>Even though our brains might plan out a series of tasks in a sequential
type of way (this, then this, then this), the evented nature of our
brain operation makes recovery/retry/forking of flow control almost
effortless. If you’re out running errands, and you realize you left a
shopping list at home, it doesn’t end the day because you didn’t plan
that ahead of time. Your brain routes around this hiccup easily: you go
home, get the list, then head right back out to the store.</p>

<p>But the brittle nature of manually hardcoded callbacks (even with
hardcoded error handling) is often far less graceful. Once you end up
specifying (aka pre-planning) all the various eventualities/paths, the
code becomes so convoluted that it’s hard to ever maintain or update it.</p>

<p><em>That</em> is what callback hell is all about! The nesting/indentations are
basically a side show, a red herring.</p>

<p>And as if all that’s not enough, we haven’t even touched what happens
when two or more chains of these callback continuations are happening
simultaneously, or when the third step branches out into parallel
callbacks with gates or latches, or…OMG, my brain hurts, how about
yours!?</p>

<p>Are you catching the notion here that our sequential, blocking brain
planning behaviors just don’t map well onto callback-oriented async
code? That’s the first major deficiency of callbacks:
they express asynchrony in code in ways our brains have to fight just to
keep in sync with (pun intended!).</p>
</div></section>





</div></section>

















































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
