<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Tale of Five Callbacks</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 2. Callbacks">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-2-callbacks">


















































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Trust Issues"><div class="epub__sect1" id="trust-issues">





















<section data-type="sect2" data-pdf-bookmark="Tale of Five Callbacks"><div class="epub__sect2" id="tale-of-five-callbacks">
<h2>Tale of Five Callbacks</h2>

<p>It might not be terribly obvious why this is such a big deal. Let me
construct an exaggerated scenario to illustrate the hazards of trust at
play.</p>

<p>Imagine you’re a developer tasked with building out an ecommerce
checkout system for a site that sells expensive TVs. You already have
all the various pages of the checkout system built out just fine. On the
last page, when the user clicks “confirm” to buy the TV, you need to
call a third-party function (provided, say, by some analytics tracking
company) so that the sale can be tracked.</p>

<p>You notice that they’ve provided what looks like an async tracking
utility, probably for the sake of performance best practices, which
means you need to pass in a callback function. In this continuation that
you pass in, you will have the final code that charges the customer’s
credit card and displays the thank you page.</p>

<p>This code might look like:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__nx">analytics</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">trackPurchase</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">purchaseData</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(){</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">chargeCreditCard</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">displayThankyouPage</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>

<p>Easy enough, right? You write the code, test it, everything works, and
you deploy to production. Everyone’s happy!</p>

<p>Six months go by and no issues. You’ve almost forgotten you even wrote
that code. One morning, you’re at a coffee shop before work, casually
enjoying your latte, when you get a panicked call from your boss
insisting you drop the coffee and rush into work right away.</p>

<p>When you arrive, you find out that a high-profile customer has had his
credit card charged five times for the same TV, and he’s understandably
upset. Customer service has already issued an apology and processed a
refund. But your boss demands to know how this could possibly have
happened. “Don’t we have tests for stuff like this!?”</p>

<p>You don’t even remember the code you wrote. But you dig back in and
start trying to find out what could have gone awry.</p>

<p>After digging through some logs, you come to the conclusion that the
only explanation is that the analytics utility somehow, for some reason,
called your callback five times instead of once. Nothing in their
documentation mentions anything about this.</p>

<p>Frustrated, you contact customer support, who of course is as astonished
as you are. They agree to escalate it to their developers, and promise
to get back to you. The next day, you receive a lengthy email explaining
what they found, which you promptly forward to your boss.</p>

<p>Apparently, the developers at the analytics company had been working on
some experimental code that, under certain conditions, would retry the
provided callback once per second, for five seconds, before failing with
a timeout. They had never intended to push that into production, but
somehow they did, and they’re totally embarrassed and apologetic. They
go into plenty of detail about how they’ve identified the breakdown and
what they’ll do to ensure it never happens again. Yadda, yadda.</p>

<p>What’s next?</p>

<p>You talk it over with your boss, but he’s not feeling particularly
comfortable with the state of things. He insists, and you reluctantly
agree, that you can’t trust them anymore (that’s what bit you), and
that you’ll need to figure out how to protect the checkout code from
such a vulnerability again.</p>

<p>After some tinkering, you implement some simple ad hoc code like the
following, which the team seems happy with:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">tracked</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__kc">false</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>

<code class="epub__nx">analytics</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">trackPurchase</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">purchaseData</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(){</code>
    <code class="epub__k">if</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__o">!</code><code class="epub__nx">tracked</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
        <code class="epub__nx">tracked</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__kc">true</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
        <code class="epub__nx">chargeCreditCard</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>
        <code class="epub__nx">displayThankyouPage</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>This should look familiar to you from Chapter 1, because we’re
essentially creating a latch to handle any multiple
concurrent invocations of our callback.</p>
</div>

<p>But then one of your QA engineers asks, “what happens if they never call
the callback?” Oops. Neither of you had thought about that.</p>

<p>You begin to chase down the rabbit hole, and think of all the possible
things that could go wrong with them calling your callback. Here’s
roughly the list you come up with of ways the analytics utility could
misbehave:</p>

<ul>
<li>
<p>Call the callback too early (before it’s been tracked)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Call the callback too late (or never)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Call the callback too few or too many times (like the problem you
encountered!)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Fail to pass along any necessary environment/parameters to your
callback</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Swallow any errors/exceptions that may happen</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>…</p>
</li>
</ul>

<p>That should feel like a troubling list, because it is. You’re probably
slowly starting to realize that you’re going to have to invent an awful
lot of ad hoc logic <em>in each and every single callback</em> that’s passed to
a utility you’re not positive you can trust.</p>

<p>Now you realize a bit more completely just how hellish callback hell
is.</p>
</div></section>



















</div></section>



































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
