<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Trust Issues</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 2. Callbacks">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-2-callbacks">


















































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Trust Issues"><div class="epub__sect1" id="trust-issues">
<h1>Trust Issues</h1>

<p>The mismatch between sequential brain planning and callback-driven async
JS code is only part of the problem with callbacks. There’s something
much deeper to be concerned about.</p>

<p>Let’s once again revisit the notion of a callback function as the
continuation (aka the second half) of our program:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__c1">// A</code>
<code class="epub__nx">ajax</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">".."</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(..){</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// C</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__c1">// B</code></pre>

<p><code>// A</code> and <code>// B</code> happen <em>now</em>, under the direct control of the main JS
program. But <code>// C</code> gets deferred to happen <em>later</em>, and under the
control of another party—in this case, the <code>ajax(..)</code> function. In a
basic sense, that sort of hand-off of control doesn’t regularly cause
lots of problems for programs.</p>

<p>But don’t be fooled by its infrequency and assume that this control switch isn’t a
big deal. In fact, it’s one of the worst (and yet most subtle) problems
with callback-driven design. It revolves around the idea that sometimes
<code>ajax(..)</code> (i.e., the party you hand your callback continuation to) is
not a function that you wrote, or that you directly control. Many times
it’s a utility provided by some third party.</p>

<p>We call this <em>inversion of control</em>, when you take part of your program
and give over control of its execution to another third party. There’s
an unspoken contract that exists between your code and the third-party
utility—a set of things you expect to be maintained.</p>




























</div></section>



































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
