<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Review</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 2. Callbacks">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-2-callbacks">














































































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Review"><div class="epub__sect1" id="review_ch02">
<h1>Review</h1>

<p>Callbacks are the fundamental unit of asynchrony in JS. But they’re not
enough for the evolving landscape of async programming as JS matures.</p>

<p>First, our brains plan things out in sequential, blocking,
single-threaded semantic ways, but callbacks express asynchronous flow
in a rather nonlinear, nonsequential way, which makes reasoning properly
about such code much harder. Hard-to-reason-about code is bad code that
leads to bad bugs.</p>

<p>We need a way to express asynchrony in a more synchronous, sequential,
blocking manner, just like our brains do.</p>

<p>Second, and more importantly, callbacks suffer from inversion of
control in that they implicitly give control over to another party
(often a third-party utility not in your control!) to invoke the
continuation of your program. This control transfer leads us to a
troubling list of trust issues, such as whether the callback is called
more times than we expect.</p>

<p>Inventing ad hoc logic to solve these trust issues is possible, but it’s
more difficult than it should be, and it produces code that is clunkier, harder to maintain, and likely insufficiently protected
from these hazards until you get visibly bitten by the bugs.</p>

<p>We need a generalized solution to all of the trust issues, one that
can be reused for as many callbacks as we create without all the extra
boilerplate overhead.</p>

<p>We need something better than callbacks. They’ve served us well to this
point, but the future of JavaScript demands more sophisticated and
capable async patterns. The subsequent chapters in this book dive
into those emerging evolutions.</p>
</div></section>







</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
