<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 3. Promises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 3. Promises">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-3-promises">
<h1><span class="epub__label">Chapter 3. </span>Promises</h1>


<p>In Chapter 2, we identified two major categories of deficiencies with
using callbacks to express program asynchrony and manage concurrency:
lack of sequentiality and lack of trustability. Now that we understand
the problems more intimately, it’s time we turn our attention to
patterns that can address them.</p>

<p>The issue we want to address first is the inversion of control, the
trust that is so fragilely held and so easily lost.</p>

<p>Recall that we wrap up the continuation of our program in a callback
function, and hand that callback over to another party (potentially even
external code) and just cross our fingers that it will do the right
thing with the invocation of the callback.</p>

<p>We do this because we want to say, “here’s what happens <em>later</em>, after
the current step finishes.”</p>

<p>But what if we could uninvert that inversion of control? What if,
instead of handing the continuation of our program to another party, we
could expect it to return us a capability to know when its task
finishes, and then our code could decide what to do next?</p>

<p>This paradigm is called <em>Promises</em>.</p>

<p>Promises are starting to take the JS world by storm, as developers and
specification writers alike desperately seek to untangle the insanity of
callback hell in their code/design. In fact, most new async APIs being
added to the JS/DOM platform are being built on Promises. So it’s probably a
good idea to dig in and learn them, don’t you think!?</p>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>The word “immediately” is used frequently in this chapter,
generally to refer to some Promise resolution action. However, in
essentially all cases, “immediately” means in terms of the Job queue
behavior (see Chapter 1), not in the strictly synchronous <em>now</em> sense.</p>
</div>






























































































































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
