<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Completion Event</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 3. Promises">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-3-promises">























<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="What Is a Promise?"><div class="epub__sect1" id="what-is-a-promise">































<section data-type="sect2" data-pdf-bookmark="Completion Event"><div class="epub__sect2" id="completion-event">
<h2>Completion Event</h2>

<p>As we just saw, an individual Promise behaves as a future value. But
there’s another way to think of the resolution of a Promise: as a
flow-control mechanism—a temporal this-then-that—for two or more
steps in an asynchronous task.</p>

<p>Let’s imagine calling a function <code>foo(..)</code> to perform some task. We
don’t know about any of its details, nor do we care. It may complete the
task right away, or it may take a while.</p>

<p>We just simply need to know when <code>foo(..)</code> finishes so that we can move
on to our next task. In other words, we’d like a way to be notified of
<code>foo(..)</code>’s completion so that we can continue.</p>

<p>In typical JavaScript fashion, if you need to listen for a notification,
you’d likely think of that in terms of events. So we could reframe our
need for notification as a need to listen for a <em>completion event</em> (or
<em>continuation event</em>) emitted by <code>foo(..)</code>.</p>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>Whether you call it a completion or a continuation
event depends on your perspective. Is the focus more on what happens
with <code>foo(..)</code>, or what happens after <code>foo(..)</code> finishes? Both
perspectives are accurate and useful. The event notification tells us
that <code>foo(..)</code> has completed, but also that it’s OK to continue with
the next step. Indeed, the callback you pass to be called for the event
notification is itself what we’ve previously called a continuation.
The completion event is a bit more focused on the <code>foo(..)</code>, which has our attention at present, so we call it a completion event
for the rest of this text.</p>
</div>

<p>With callbacks, the notification would be our callback invoked by the
task (<code>foo(..)</code>). But with Promises, we turn the relationship around,
and expect that we can listen for an event from <code>foo(..)</code>, and when
notified, proceed accordingly.</p>

<p>First, consider some pseudocode:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">x</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// start doing something that could take a while</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">42</code> <code class="epub__p">)</code>

<code class="epub__nx">on</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">foo</code> <code class="epub__s2">"completion"</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// now we can do the next step!</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__nx">on</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">foo</code> <code class="epub__s2">"error"</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// oops, something went wrong in `foo(..)`</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code></pre>

<p>We call <code>foo(..)</code> and then we set up two event listeners, one for
<span class="epub__keep-together"><code>"completion"</code></span> and one for <code>"error"</code>—the two possible final
outcomes of the <code>foo(..)</code> call. In essence, <code>foo(..)</code> doesn’t even
appear to be aware that the calling code has subscribed to these events,
which makes for a very nice <em>separation of concerns</em>.</p>

<p>Unfortunately, such code would require some magic of the JS
environment that doesn’t exist (and would likely be a bit impractical).
Here’s the more natural way we could express that in JS:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">x</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// start doing something that could take a while</code>

    <code class="epub__c1">// make a `listener` event notification</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// capability to return</code>

    <code class="epub__k">return</code> <code class="epub__nx">listener</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">evt</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">42</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__nx">evt</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">on</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"completion"</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(){</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// now we can do the next step!</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__nx">evt</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">on</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"failure"</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">err</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// oops, something went wrong in `foo(..)`</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>

<p><code>foo(..)</code> expressly creates an event subscription capability to return
back, and the calling code receives and registers the two event handlers
against it.</p>

<p>The inversion from normal callback-oriented code should be obvious, and
it’s intentional. Instead of passing the callbacks to <code>foo(..)</code>, it
returns an event capability we call <code>evt</code>, which receives the callbacks.</p>

<p>But if you recall from Chapter 2, callbacks themselves represent an
inversion of control. So inverting the callback pattern is actually an
inversion of inversion, or an <em>uninversion of control</em>—restoring
control back to the calling code where we wanted it to be in the first
place.</p>

<p>One important benefit is that multiple separate parts of the code can be
given the event listening capability, and they can all independently be
notified when <code>foo(..)</code> completes, in order to perform subsequent steps:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">evt</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">42</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// let `bar(..)` listen to `foo(..)`'s completion</code>
<code class="epub__nx">bar</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">evt</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// also, let `baz(..)` listen to `foo(..)`'s completion</code>
<code class="epub__nx">baz</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">evt</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>

<p>Uninversion of control enables a nicer separation of concerns, where
<code>bar(..)</code> and <code>baz(..)</code> don’t need to be involved in how <code>foo(..)</code> is
called. Similarly, <code>foo(..)</code> doesn’t need to know or care that <code>bar(..)</code>
and <code>baz(..)</code> exist or are waiting to be notified when <code>foo(..)</code>
completes.</p>

<p>Essentially, this <code>evt</code> object is a neutral third-party negotiation
between the separate concerns.</p>










<section data-type="sect3" data-pdf-bookmark="Promise “Events”"><div class="epub__sect3" id="promise-events">
<h3>Promise “Events”</h3>

<p>As you may have guessed by now, the <code>evt</code> event listening capability is
an analogy for a Promise.</p>

<p>In a Promise-based approach, the previous snippet would have <code>foo(..)</code>
creating and returning a <code>Promise</code> instance, and that promise would then
be passed to <code>bar(..)</code> and <code>baz(..)</code>.</p>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>The Promise resolution “events” we listen for aren’t strictly
events (though they certainly behave like events for these purposes),
and they’re not typically called <code>"completion"</code> or <code>"error"</code>. Instead,
we use <code>then(..)</code> to register a <code>"then"</code> event. Or perhaps more
precisely, <code>then(..)</code> registers <code>"fulfillment"</code> and/or <code>"rejection"</code>
event(s), though we don’t see those terms used explicitly in the code.</p>
</div>

<p>Consider:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">x</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// start doing something that could take a while</code>

    <code class="epub__c1">// construct and return a promise</code>
    <code class="epub__k">return</code> <code class="epub__k">new</code> <code class="epub__nx">Promise</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">resolve</code><code class="epub__p">,</code><code class="epub__nx">reject</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
        <code class="epub__c1">// eventually, call `resolve(..)` or `reject(..)`,</code>
        <code class="epub__c1">// which are the resolution callbacks for</code>
        <code class="epub__c1">// the promise.</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">p</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">42</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__nx">bar</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">p</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__nx">baz</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">p</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>The pattern shown with <code>new Promise( function(..){ .. } )</code> is
generally called the
<em>revealing
constructor</em>. The function passed in is executed immediately (not async
deferred, as callbacks to <code>then(..)</code> are), and it’s provided two
parameters, which in this case we’ve named <code>resolve</code> and <code>reject</code>. These
are the resolution functions for the promise. <code>resolve(..)</code> generally
signals fulfillment, and <code>reject(..)</code> signals rejection.</p>
</div>

<p>You can probably guess what the internals of <code>bar(..)</code> and <code>baz(..)</code>
might look like:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">bar</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">fooPromise</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// listen for `foo(..)` to complete</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">fooPromise</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">then</code><code class="epub__p">(</code>
        <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(){</code>
            <code class="epub__c1">// `foo(..)` has now finished, so</code>
            <code class="epub__c1">// do `bar(..)`'s task</code>
        <code class="epub__p">},</code>
        <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(){</code>
            <code class="epub__c1">// oops, something went wrong in `foo(..)`</code>
        <code class="epub__p">}</code>
    <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// ditto for `baz(..)`</code></pre>

<p>Promise resolution doesn’t necessarily need to involve sending
along a message, as it did when we were examining Promises as future
values. It can just be a flow-control signal, as used in the previous snippet.</p>

<p class="epub__pagebreak-before">Another way to approach this is:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">bar</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// `foo(..)` has definitely finished, so</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// do `bar(..)`'s task</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">oopsBar</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// oops, something went wrong in `foo(..)`,</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// so `bar(..)` didn't run</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// ditto for `baz()` and `oopsBaz()`</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">p</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">42</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__nx">p</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">then</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">bar</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__nx">oopsBar</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__nx">p</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">then</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">baz</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__nx">oopsBaz</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>If you’ve seen Promise-based coding before, you might be tempted
to believe that the last two lines of that code could be written as
<code>p.then( .. ).then( .. )</code>, using chaining, rather than
<code>p.then(..); p.then(..)</code>. That would have an entirely different
behavior, so be careful! The difference might not be clear right now,
but it’s actually a different async pattern than we’ve seen thus far:
splitting/forking. Don’t worry! We’ll come back to this point later in
this chapter.</p>
</div>

<p>Instead of passing the <code>p</code> promise to <code>bar(..)</code> and <code>baz(..)</code>, we use
the promise to control when <code>bar(..)</code> and <code>baz(..)</code> will get executed,
if ever. The primary difference is in the error handling.</p>

<p>In the first snippet’s approach, <code>bar(..)</code> is called regardless of
whether <code>foo(..)</code> succeeds or fails, and it handles its own fallback
logic if it’s notified that <code>foo(..)</code> failed. The same is true for
<code>baz(..)</code>, obviously.</p>

<p>In the second snippet, <code>bar(..)</code> gets called only if <code>foo(..)</code> succeeds,
and otherwise <code>oopsBar(..)</code> gets called. Ditto for <code>baz(..)</code>.</p>

<p>Neither approach is correct per se. There will be cases where one is
preferred over the other.</p>

<p>In either case, the promise <code>p</code> that comes back from <code>foo(..)</code> is used
to control what happens next.</p>

<p>Moreover, the fact that both snippets end up calling <code>then(..)</code> twice
against the same promise <code>p</code> illustrates the point made earlier, which
is that Promises (once resolved) retain their same resolution
(fulfillment or rejection) forever, and can subsequently be observed as
many times as necessary.</p>

<p>Whenever <code>p</code> is resolved, the next step will always be the same, both
<em>now</em> and <em>later</em>.</p>
</div></section>



</div></section>





</div></section>























































































































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
