<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Future Value</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 3. Promises">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-3-promises">























<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="What Is a Promise?"><div class="epub__sect1" id="what-is-a-promise">

















<section data-type="sect2" data-pdf-bookmark="Future Value"><div class="epub__sect2" id="future-value">
<h2>Future Value</h2>

<p>Imagine this scenario: I walk up to the counter at a fast-food
restaurant, and place an order for a cheeseburger. I hand the cashier
$1.47. By placing my order and paying for it, I’ve made a request for a
<em>value</em> back (the cheeseburger). I’ve started a transaction.</p>

<p>But often, the chesseburger is not immediately available for me. The
cashier hands me something in place of my cheeseburger: a receipt with
an order number on it. This order number is an IOU (“I owe you”)
<em>promise</em> that ensures that I should eventually receive my
cheeseburger.</p>

<p>So I hold onto my receipt and order number. I know it represents my
<em>future cheeseburger</em>, so I don’t need to worry about it anymore—aside from being hungry!</p>

<p>While I wait, I can do other things, like send a text message to a
friend that says, “Hey, can you come join me for lunch? I’m going to eat
a cheeseburger.”</p>

<p>I am reasoning about my <em>future cheeseburger</em> already, even though I
don’t have it in my hands yet. My brain is able to do this because it’s
treating the order number as a placeholder for the cheeseburger. The
placeholder essentially makes the value <em>time independent</em>. It’s a
<em>future value</em>.</p>

<p>Eventually, I hear, “order 113!” and I gleefully walk back up to the
counter with receipt in hand. I hand my receipt to the cashier, and I
take my cheeseburger in return.</p>

<p>In other words, once my <em>future value</em> was ready, I exchanged my
value-promise for the value itself.</p>

<p>But there’s another possible outcome. They call my order number, but
when I go to retrieve my cheeseburger, the cashier regretfully informs
me, “I’m sorry, but we appear to be all out of cheeseburgers.” Setting
aside the customer frustration of this scenario for a moment, we can see
an important characteristic of <em>future values</em>: they can either indicate
a success or failure.</p>

<p>Every time I order a cheeseburger, I know that I’ll either get a
cheeseburger eventually, or I’ll get the sad news of the cheeseburger
shortage, and I’ll have to figure out something else to eat for lunch.</p>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>In code, things are not quite as simple, because metaphorically
the order number may never be called, in which case we’re left
indefinitely in an unresolved state. We’ll come back to dealing with
that case later.</p>
</div>










<section data-type="sect3" data-pdf-bookmark="Values Now and Later"><div class="epub__sect3" id="values-now-and-later">
<h3>Values Now and Later</h3>

<p>This all might sound too mentally abstract to apply to your code. So
let’s be more concrete.</p>

<p>However, before we can introduce how Promises work in this fashion,
we’re going to derive in code that we already understand—callbacks!—how
to handle these <em>future values</em>.</p>

<p>When you write code to reason about a value, such as performing math on
a <code>number</code>, whether you realize it or not, you’ve been assuming
something very fundamental about that value, which is that it’s a
concrete <em>now</em> value already:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">x</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__nx">y</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>

<code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">x</code> <code class="epub__o">+</code> <code class="epub__nx">y</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// NaN  &lt;-- because `x` isn't set yet</code></pre>

<p>The <code>x + y</code> operation assumes both <code>x</code> and <code>y</code> are already set. In terms
we’ll expound on shortly, we assume the <code>x</code> and <code>y</code> values are already
<em>resolved</em>.</p>

<p>It would be nonsense to expect that the <code>+</code> operator by itself would
somehow be magically capable of detecting and waiting around until both
<code>x</code> and <code>y</code> are resolved (aka ready), and only then do the operation.
That would cause chaos in the program if different statements finished
<em>now</em> and others finished <em>later</em>, right?</p>

<p>How could you possibly reason about the relationships between two
statements if either one (or both) of them might not be finished yet? If
statement 2 relies on statement 1 being finished, there are just two
outcomes: either statement 1 finished right <em>now</em> and everything
proceeds fine, or statement 1 didn’t finish yet, and thus statement 2 is
going to fail.</p>

<p>If this sort of thing sounds familiar from Chapter 1, good!</p>

<p>Let’s go back to our <code>x + y</code> math operation. Imagine if there was a way
to say, “Add <code>x</code> and <code>y</code>, but if either of them isn’t ready yet, just
wait until they are. Add them as soon as you can.”</p>

<p>Your brain might have just jumped to callbacks. OK, so…</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">add</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">getX</code><code class="epub__p">,</code><code class="epub__nx">getY</code><code class="epub__p">,</code><code class="epub__nx">cb</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">x</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__nx">y</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">getX</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">xVal</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
        <code class="epub__nx">x</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">xVal</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
        <code class="epub__c1">// both are ready?</code>
        <code class="epub__k">if</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">y</code> <code class="epub__o">!=</code> <code class="epub__kc">undefined</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
            <code class="epub__nx">cb</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">x</code> <code class="epub__o">+</code> <code class="epub__nx">y</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>    <code class="epub__c1">// send along sum</code>
        <code class="epub__p">}</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">getY</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">yVal</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
        <code class="epub__nx">y</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">yVal</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
        <code class="epub__c1">// both are ready?</code>
        <code class="epub__k">if</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">x</code> <code class="epub__o">!=</code> <code class="epub__kc">undefined</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
            <code class="epub__nx">cb</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">x</code> <code class="epub__o">+</code> <code class="epub__nx">y</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>    <code class="epub__c1">// send along sum</code>
        <code class="epub__p">}</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// `fetchX()` and `fetchY()` are sync or async</code>
<code class="epub__c1">// functions</code>
<code class="epub__nx">add</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">fetchX</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__nx">fetchY</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">sum</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">sum</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// that was easy, huh?</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>

<p>Take just a moment to let the beauty (or lack thereof) of that snippet
sink in (whistles patiently).</p>

<p>While the ugliness is undeniable, there’s something very important about this async pattern.</p>

<p>In that snippet, we treated <code>x</code> and <code>y</code> as future values, and we express
an operation <code>add(..)</code> that (from the outside) does not care whether <code>x</code>
or <code>y</code> or both are available right away. In other words, it
normalizes the <em>now</em> and <em>later</em>, such that we can rely on a predictable
outcome of the <code>add(..)</code> operation.</p>

<p>By using an <code>add(..)</code> that is temporally consistent—it behaves the
same across <em>now</em> and <em>later</em> times—the async code is much easier to
reason about.</p>

<p>To put it more plainly: to consistently handle both <em>now</em> and <em>later</em>,
we make both of them <em>later</em>: all operations become async.</p>

<p>Of course, this rough callbacks-based approach leaves much to be
desired. It’s just a first tiny step toward realizing the benefits of
reasoning about future values without worrying about the time aspect
of when it’s available or not.</p>
</div></section>













<section data-type="sect3" data-pdf-bookmark="Promise Value"><div class="epub__sect3" id="promise-value">
<h3>Promise Value</h3>

<p>We’ll definitely go into a lot more detail about Promises later in the
chapter—so don’t worry if some of this is confusing—but let’s just
briefly glimpse at how we can express the <code>x + y</code> example via
<code>Promise</code>s functions:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">add</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">xPromise</code><code class="epub__p">,</code><code class="epub__nx">yPromise</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// `Promise.all([ .. ])` takes an array of promises,</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// and returns a new promise that waits on them</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// all to finish</code>
    <code class="epub__k">return</code> <code class="epub__nx">Promise</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">all</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__p">[</code><code class="epub__nx">xPromise</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__nx">yPromise</code><code class="epub__p">]</code> <code class="epub__p">)</code>

    <code class="epub__c1">// when that promise is resolved, let's take the</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// received `X` and `Y` values and add them together.</code>
    <code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">then</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">values</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
        <code class="epub__c1">// `values` is an array of the messages from the</code>
        <code class="epub__c1">// previously resolved promises</code>
        <code class="epub__k">return</code> <code class="epub__nx">values</code><code class="epub__p">[</code><code class="epub__mi">0</code><code class="epub__p">]</code> <code class="epub__o">+</code> <code class="epub__nx">values</code><code class="epub__p">[</code><code class="epub__mi">1</code><code class="epub__p">];</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// `fetchX()` and `fetchY()` return promises for</code>
<code class="epub__c1">// their respective values, which may be ready</code>
<code class="epub__c1">// now or later.</code>
<code class="epub__nx">add</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">fetchX</code><code class="epub__p">(),</code> <code class="epub__nx">fetchY</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">)</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// we get a promise back for the sum of those</code>
<code class="epub__c1">// two numbers.</code>
<code class="epub__c1">// now we chain-call `then(..)` to wait for the</code>
<code class="epub__c1">// resolution of that returned promise.</code>
<code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">then</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">sum</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">sum</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// that was easier!</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>

<p>There are two layers of Promises in this snippet.</p>

<p><code>fetchX()</code> and <code>fetchY()</code> are called directly, and the values they
return (promises!) are passed into <code>add(..)</code>. The underlying values
those promises represent may be ready <em>now</em> or <em>later</em>, but each promise
normalizes the behavior to be the same regardless. We reason about <code>X</code>
and <code>Y</code> values in a time-independent way. They are future values.</p>

<p>The second layer is the promise that <code>add(..)</code> creates (via
<code>Promise.all([ .. ])</code>) and returns, which we wait on by calling
<code>then(..)</code>. When the <code>add(..)</code> operation completes, our <code>sum</code> future
value is ready and we can print it out. We hide inside of <code>add(..)</code> the
logic for waiting on the <code>X</code> and <code>Y</code> future values.</p>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>Inside <code>add(..)</code>, the <code>Promise.all([ .. ])</code> call creates a
promise (which is waiting on <code>promiseX</code> and <code>promiseY</code> to resolve). The
chained call to <code>.then(..)</code> creates another promise, which the
<code>return values[0] + values[1]</code> line immediately resolves (with the
result of the addition). Thus, the <code>then(..)</code> call we chain off the end
of the <code>add(..)</code> call—at the end of the snippet—is actually
operating on that second promise returned, rather than the first one
created by <code>Promise.all([ .. ])</code>. Also, though we are not chaining off
the end of that second <code>then(..)</code>, it too has created another promise,
had we chosen to observe/use it. This Promise chaining stuff will be
explained in much greater detail later in this chapter.</p>
</div>

<p>Just like with cheeseburger orders, it’s possible that the resolution of
a Promise is rejection instead of fulfillment. Unlike a fulfilled
Promise, where the value is always programmatic, a rejection value—commonly called a <em>rejection reason</em>—can either be set directly <span class="epub__keep-together">by
the program</span> logic, or it can result implicitly from a runtime <span class="epub__keep-together">exception</span>.</p>

<p>With Promises, the <code>then(..)</code> call can actually take two functions, the
first for fulfillment (as shown earlier), and the second for <span class="epub__keep-together">rejection</span>:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__nx">add</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">fetchX</code><code class="epub__p">(),</code> <code class="epub__nx">fetchY</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">)</code>
<code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">then</code><code class="epub__p">(</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// fullfillment handler</code>
    <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">sum</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
        <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">sum</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
    <code class="epub__p">},</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// rejection handler</code>
    <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">err</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
        <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">error</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">err</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// bummer!</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code>
<code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>

<p>If something went wrong getting <code>X</code> or <code>Y</code>, or something somehow failed
during the addition, the promise that <code>add(..)</code> returns is rejected, and
the second callback error handler passed to <code>then(..)</code> will receive the
rejection value from the promise.</p>

<p>Because Promises encapsulate the time-dependent state—waiting on the
fulfillment or rejection of the underlying value—from the outside,
the Promise itself is time-independent, and thus Promises can be
composed (combined) in predictable ways regardless of the timing or
outcome underneath.</p>

<p>Moreover, once a Promise is resolved, it stays that way forever—it
becomes an <em>immutable value</em> at that point—and can then be observed
as many times as necessary.</p>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>Because a Promise is externally immutable once resolved, it’s
now safe to pass that value around to any party and know that it cannot
be modified accidentally or maliciously. This is especially true in
relation to multiple parties observing the resolution of a Promise. It
is not possible for one party to affect another party’s ability to
observe Promise resolution. Immutability may sound like an academic
topic, but it’s actually one of the most fundamental and important
aspects of Promise design, and shouldn’t be casually passed over.</p>
</div>

<p>That’s one of the most powerful and important concepts to understand
about Promises. With a fair amount of work, you could ad hoc create the
same effects with nothing but ugly callback composition, but that’s not
really an effective strategy, especially because you have to do it over
and over again.</p>

<p>Promises are an easily repeatable mechanism for encapsulating and
composing future values.</p>
</div></section>



</div></section>



















</div></section>























































































































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
