<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Thenable Duck Typing</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 3. Promises">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-3-promises">





































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Thenable Duck Typing"><div class="epub__sect1" id="thenable-duck-typing">
<h1>Thenable Duck Typing</h1>

<p>In Promises-land, an important detail is how to know for sure if some
value is a genuine Promise or not. Or more directly, is it a value that
will behave like a Promise?</p>

<p>Given that Promises are constructed by the <code>new Promise(..)</code> syntax, you
might think that <code>p instanceof Promise</code> would be an acceptable check.
But unfortunately, there are a number of reasons that’s not totally
sufficient.</p>

<p>Mainly, you can receive a Promise value from another browser window
(iframe, etc.), which would have its own Promise different from the
one in the current window/frame, and that check would fail to identify
the Promise instance.</p>

<p>Moreover, a library or framework may choose to vend its own Promises and
not use the native ES6 <code>Promise</code> implementation to do so. In fact, you
may very well be using Promises with libraries in older browsers that
have no Promise at all.</p>

<p>When we discuss Promise resolution processes later in this chapter, it
will become more obvious why it is still very important to be able to recognize and assimilate a Promise-like value that is not genuine. But for
now, just take my word for it that it’s a critical piece of the puzzle.</p>

<p>As such, it was decided that the way to recognize a Promise (or
something that behaves like a Promise) would be to define something
called a <em>thenable</em> as any object or function which has a <code>then(..)</code>
method on it. It is assumed that any such value is a Promise-conforming
thenable.</p>

<p>The general term for <em>type checks</em> that make assumptions about a value’s
<em>type</em> based on its shape (what properties are present) is called <em>duck
typing</em>—“If it looks like a duck, and quacks like a duck, it must be
a duck” (see the <em>Types &amp; Grammar</em> title of this series). So the
duck typing check for a thenable would roughly be:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__k">if</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">p</code> <code class="epub__o">!==</code> <code class="epub__kc">null</code> <code class="epub__o">&amp;&amp;</code>
    <code class="epub__p">(</code>
        <code class="epub__k">typeof</code> <code class="epub__nx">p</code> <code class="epub__o">===</code> <code class="epub__s2">"object"</code> <code class="epub__o">||</code>
        <code class="epub__k">typeof</code> <code class="epub__nx">p</code> <code class="epub__o">===</code> <code class="epub__s2">"function"</code>
    <code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__o">&amp;&amp;</code>
    <code class="epub__k">typeof</code> <code class="epub__nx">p</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">then</code> <code class="epub__o">===</code> <code class="epub__s2">"function"</code>
<code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// assume it's a thenable!</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>
<code class="epub__k">else</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// not a thenable</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code></pre>

<p>Yuck! Setting aside the fact that this logic is a bit ugly to implement
in various places, there’s something deeper and more troubling going on.</p>

<p>If you try to fulfill a Promise with any object/function value that
happens to have a <code>then(..)</code> function on it, but you weren’t intending
it to be treated as a Promise/thenable, you’re out of luck, because it
will automatically be recognized as thenable and treated with special
rules (see later in the chapter).</p>

<p>This is even true if you didn’t realize the value has a <code>then(..)</code> on
it. For example:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">o</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code> <code class="epub__nx">then</code><code class="epub__o">:</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(){}</code> <code class="epub__p">};</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// make `v` be `[[Prototype]]`-linked to `o`</code>
<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">v</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nb">Object</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">create</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">o</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__nx">v</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">someStuff</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__s2">"cool"</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__nx">v</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">otherStuff</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__s2">"not so cool"</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>

<code class="epub__nx">v</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">hasOwnProperty</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"then"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>     <code class="epub__c1">// false</code></pre>

<p><code>v</code> doesn’t look like a Promise or thenable at all. It’s just a plain
object with some properties on it. You’re probably just intending to
send that value around like any other object.</p>

<p>But unknown to you, <code>v</code> is also <code>[[Prototype]]</code>-linked (see the <em>this &amp;
Object Prototypes</em> title of this series) to another object <code>o</code>,
which happens to have a <code>then(..)</code> on it. So the thenable duck typing
checks will think and assume <code>v</code> is a thenable. Uh-oh.</p>

<p>It doesn’t even need to be something as directly intentional as that:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__nb">Object</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">prototype</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">then</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(){};</code>
<code class="epub__nb">Array</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">prototype</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">then</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(){};</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">v1</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code> <code class="epub__nx">hello</code><code class="epub__o">:</code> <code class="epub__s2">"world"</code> <code class="epub__p">};</code>
<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">v2</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__p">[</code> <code class="epub__s2">"Hello"</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__s2">"World"</code> <code class="epub__p">];</code></pre>

<p>Both <code>v1</code> and <code>v2</code> will be assumed to be thenables. You can’t control or
predict if any other code accidentally or maliciously adds <code>then(..)</code> to
<code>Object.prototype</code>, <code>Array.prototype</code>, or any of the other native
prototypes. And if what’s specified is a function that doesn’t call
either of its parameters as callbacks, then any Promise resolved with
such a value will just silently hang forever! Crazy.</p>

<p>Sound implausible or unlikely? Perhaps.</p>

<p>But keep in mind that there were several well-known non-Promise
libraries preexisting in the community prior to ES6 that happened to
already have a method on them called <code>then(..)</code>. Some of those libraries
chose to rename their own methods to avoid collision (that sucks!).
Others have simply been relegated to the unfortunate status of
“incompatible with Promise-based coding” in reward for their inability
to change to get out of the way.</p>

<p>The standards decision to hijack the previously nonreserved—and
completely general-purpose sounding—<code>then</code> property name means that
no value (or any of its delegates), either past, present, or future, can
have a <code>then(..)</code> function present, either on purpose or by accident, or
that value will be confused for a thenable in Promises systems, which
will probably create bugs that are really hard to track down.</p>
<div data-type="warning" epub:type="warning"><h6>Warning</h6>
<p>I do not like how we ended up with duck typing of thenables
for Promise recognition. There were other options, such as “branding” or
even “anti-branding”; what we got seems like a worst-case compromise.
But it’s not all doom and gloom. Thenable duck typing can be helpful, as
we’ll see later. Just beware that thenable duck typing can be hazardous
if it incorrectly identifies something as a Promise that isn’t.</p>
</div>
</div></section>









































































































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
