<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Failing to Pass Along Any Parameters/Environment</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 3. Promises">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-3-promises">



















































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Promise Trust"><div class="epub__sect1" id="promise-trust">











































































<section data-type="sect2" data-pdf-bookmark="Failing to Pass Along Any Parameters/Environment"><div class="epub__sect2" id="failing-to-pass-along-any-parametersenvironment">
<h2>Failing to Pass Along Any Parameters/Environment</h2>

<p>Promises can have, at most, one resolution value (fulfillment or
rejection).</p>

<p>If you don’t explicitly resolve with a value either way, the value is
<code>undefined</code>, as is typical in JS. But whatever the value, it will always
be passed to all registered (and appropriate fulfillment or rejection)
callbacks, either now or in the future.</p>

<p>Something to be aware of: If you call <code>resolve(..)</code> or <code>reject(..)</code> with
multiple parameters, all subsequent parameters beyond the first will be
silently ignored. Although that might seem a violation of the guarantee
we just described, it’s not exactly, because it constitutes an invalid
usage of the Promise mechanism. Other invalid usages of the API (such as
calling <code>resolve(..)</code> multiple times) are similarly protected, so the
Promise behavior here is consistent (if not a tiny bit frustrating).</p>

<p>If you want to pass along multiple values, you must wrap them in another
single value that you pass, such as an <code>array</code> or an <code>object</code>.</p>

<p>As for environment, functions in JS always retain their closure of the
scope in which they’re defined (see the <em>Scope &amp; Closures</em> title of this
series), so they of course would continue to have access to whatever
surrounding state you provide. Of course, the same is true of
callbacks-only design, so this isn’t a specific augmentation of benefit
from Promises—but it’s a guarantee we can rely on nonetheless.</p>
</div></section>















































</div></section>



























































































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
