<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Uncaught Handling</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 3. Promises">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-3-promises">















































































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Error Handling"><div class="epub__sect1" id="error-handling">























































<section data-type="sect2" data-pdf-bookmark="Uncaught Handling"><div class="epub__sect2" id="uncaught-handling">
<h2>Uncaught Handling</h2>

<p>It’s not exactly an easy problem to solve completely. There are other (many would say better) ways to approach it.</p>

<p>Some Promise libraries have added methods for registering something like
a “global unhandled rejection” handler, which would be called instead of
a globally thrown error. But their solution for how to identify an error
as uncaught is to have an arbitrary-length timer, say three seconds,
running from time of rejection. If a Promise is rejected but no error
handler is registered before the timer fires, then it’s assumed that you
won’t ever be registering a handler, so it’s uncaught.</p>

<p>In practice, this has worked well for many libraries, as most usage
patterns don’t typically call for significant delay between Promise
rejection and observation of that rejection. But this pattern is
troublesome because three seconds is so arbitrary (even if empirical), and
also because there are indeed some cases where you want a Promise to
hold on to its rejectedness for some indefinite period of time, and you
don’t really want to have your uncaught handler called for all those
false positives (not-yet-handled uncaught errors).</p>

<p>Another more common suggestion is that Promises should have a <code>done(..)</code>
added to them, which essentially marks the Promise chain as done.
<code>done(..)</code> doesn’t create and return a Promise, so the callbacks passed
to <code>done(..)</code> are obviously not wired up to report problems to a chained
Promise that doesn’t exist.</p>

<p>So what happens instead? It’s treated as you might usually expect in
uncaught error conditions: any exception inside a <code>done(..)</code> rejection
handler would be thrown as a global uncaught error (in the developer
console, basically):</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">p</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">Promise</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">resolve</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">42</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__nx">p</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">then</code><code class="epub__p">(</code>
    <code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">fulfilled</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">msg</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
        <code class="epub__c1">// numbers don't have string functions,</code>
        <code class="epub__c1">// so will throw an error</code>
        <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">msg</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">toLowerCase</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code>
<code class="epub__p">)</code>
<code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">done</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kc">null</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__nx">handleErrors</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// if `handleErrors(..)` caused its own exception, it would</code>
<code class="epub__c1">// be thrown globally here</code></pre>

<p>This might sound more attractive than the never-ending chain or the
arbitrary timeouts. But the biggest problem is that it’s not part of the
ES6 standard, so no matter how good it sounds, at best it’s a lot longer
way off from being a reliable and ubiquitous solution.</p>

<p>Are we just stuck, then? Not entirely.</p>

<p>Browsers have a unique capability that our code does not have: they can
track and know for sure when any object gets thrown away and garbage
collected. So, browsers can track Promise objects, and whenever they get
garbage collected, if they have a rejection in them, the browser knows
for sure this was a legitimate uncaught error, and can thus
confidently know it should report it to the developer console.</p>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>At the time of this writing, both Chrome and Firefox have early
attempts at this sort of uncaught rejection capability, though support
is incomplete at best.</p>
</div>

<p>However, if a Promise doesn’t get garbage collected—it’s exceedingly
easy for that to accidentally happen through lots of different coding
patterns—the browser’s garbage collection sniffing won’t help you
know and diagnose that you have a silently rejected Promise laying
around.</p>

<p>Is there any other alternative? Yes.</p>
</div></section>



















</div></section>































































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
