<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Pit of Success</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 3. Promises">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-3-promises">















































































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Error Handling"><div class="epub__sect1" id="error-handling">





































































<section data-type="sect2" data-pdf-bookmark="Pit of Success"><div class="epub__sect2" id="pit-of-success">
<h2>Pit of Success</h2>

<p>The following is just theoretical, how Promises could be someday
changed to behave. I believe it would be far superior to what we
currently have. And I think this change would be possible even post-ES6
because I don’t think it would break web compatibility with ES6
Promises. Moreover, it can be polyfilled/prollyfilled in, if you’re
careful. Let’s take a look:</p>

<ul>
<li>
<p>Promises could default to reporting (to the developer console) any
rejection, on the next Job or event loop tick, if at that exact moment
no error handler has been registered for the Promise.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>For the cases where you want a rejected Promise to hold onto its
rejected state for an indefinite amount of time before observing, you
could call <code>defer()</code>, which suppresses automatic error reporting on that
Promise.</p>
</li>
</ul>

<p>If a Promise is rejected, it defaults to noisily reporting that fact to
the developer console (instead of defaulting to silence). You can opt
out of that reporting either implicitly (by registering an error handler
before rejection), or explicitly (with <code>defer()</code>). In either case, <em>you</em>
control the false positives.</p>

<p>Consider:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">p</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">Promise</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">reject</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"Oops"</code> <code class="epub__p">).</code><code class="epub__nx">defer</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// `foo(..)` is Promise-aware</code>
<code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">42</code> <code class="epub__p">)</code>
<code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">then</code><code class="epub__p">(</code>
    <code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">fulfilled</code><code class="epub__p">(){</code>
        <code class="epub__k">return</code> <code class="epub__nx">p</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
    <code class="epub__p">},</code>
    <code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">rejected</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">err</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
        <code class="epub__c1">// handle `foo(..)` error</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code>
<code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">...</code></pre>

<p>When we create <code>p</code>, we know we’re going to wait a while to use/observe
its rejection, so we call <code>defer()</code>—thus no global reporting.
<code>defer()</code> simply returns the same promise, for chaining purposes.</p>

<p>The promise returned from <code>foo(..)</code> gets an error handler attached
right away, so it’s implicitly opted out and no global reporting for
it occurs either.</p>

<p>But the promise returned from the <code>then(..)</code> call has no <code>defer()</code> or
error handler attached, so if it rejects (from inside either resolution
handler), then <em>it</em> will be reported to the developer console as an
uncaught error.</p>

<p><em>This design is a pit of success.</em> By default, all errors are either
handled or reported—what almost all developers in almost all cases
would expect. You either have to register a handler or you have to
intentionally opt out, and indicate you intend to defer error handling
until <em>later</em>; you’re opting for the extra responsibility in just that
specific case.</p>

<p>The only real danger in this approach is if you <code>defer()</code> a Promise but
then fail to actually ever observe/handle its rejection.</p>

<p>But you had to intentionally call <code>defer()</code> to opt into that pit of
despair—the default was the pit of success—so there’s not much
else we could do to save you from your own mistakes.</p>

<p>I think there’s still hope for Promise error handling (post-ES6). I hope
the powers that be will rethink the situation and consider this
alternative. In the meantime, you can implement this yourself (a
challenging exercise for the reader!), or use a smarter Promise
library that does so for you!</p>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>This exact model for error handling/reporting is implemented in
my <em>asynquence</em> Promise abstraction library, which is discussed in
Appendix A of this book.</p>
</div>
</div></section>





</div></section>































































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
