<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Pit of Despair</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 3. Promises">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-3-promises">















































































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Error Handling"><div class="epub__sect1" id="error-handling">









































<section data-type="sect2" data-pdf-bookmark="Pit of Despair"><div class="epub__sect2" id="pit-of-despair">
<h2>Pit of Despair</h2>

<p>Jeff Atwood noted years ago that programming languages are often set up in
such a way that, by default, developers fall into the “pit of despair”—where
accidents are punished—and that you have to try harder to get it
right. He implored us to instead create a “pit of success,” where by
default you fall into expected (successful) action, and thus would have
to try hard to fail.</p>

<p>Promise error handling is unquestionably “pit of despair” design. By
default, it assumes that you want any error to be swallowed by the
Promise state, and if you forget to observe that state, the error
silently languishes/dies in obscurity—usually despair.</p>

<p>To avoid losing an error to the silence of a forgotten/discarded
Promise, some developers have claimed that a best practice for Promise
chains is to always end your chain with a final <code>catch(..)</code>, like:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">p</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">Promise</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">resolve</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">42</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__nx">p</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">then</code><code class="epub__p">(</code>
    <code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">fulfilled</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">msg</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
        <code class="epub__c1">// numbers don't have string functions,</code>
        <code class="epub__c1">// so will throw an error</code>
        <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">msg</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">toLowerCase</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code>
<code class="epub__p">)</code>
<code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__k">catch</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">handleErrors</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>

<p>Because we didn’t pass a rejection handler to the <code>then(..)</code>, the
default handler was substituted, which simply propagates the error to
the next promise in the chain. As such, both errors that come into <code>p</code>,
and errors that come <em>after</em> <code>p</code> in its resolution (like the
<code>msg.toLowerCase()</code> one) will filter down to the final
<code>handleErrors(..)</code>.</p>

<p>Problem solved, right? Not so fast!</p>

<p>What happens if <code>handleErrors(..)</code> itself also has an error in it? Who
catches that? There’s still yet another unattended promise: the one
<code>catch(..)</code> returns, which we don’t capture and don’t register a
rejection handler for.</p>

<p>You can’t just stick another <code>catch(..)</code> on the end of that chain,
because it too could fail. The last step in any Promise chain, whatever
it is, always has the possibility, even decreasingly so, of dangling
with an uncaught error stuck inside an unobserved Promise.</p>

<p>Sound like an impossible conundrum yet?</p>
</div></section>

































</div></section>































































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
