<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Sequence Error Handling</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 3. Promises">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-3-promises">

























































































































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Promise Limitations"><div class="epub__sect1" id="promise-limitations">











<section data-type="sect2" data-pdf-bookmark="Sequence Error Handling"><div class="epub__sect2" id="sequence-error-handling">
<h2>Sequence Error Handling</h2>

<p>We covered Promise-flavored error handling in detail earlier in this
chapter. The limitations of how Promises are designed—how they chain,
specifically—creates a very easy pitfall where an error in a Promise
chain can be silently ignored accidentally.</p>

<p>But there’s something else to consider with Promise errors. Because a
Promise chain is nothing more than its constituent Promises wired
together, there’s no entity to refer to the entire chain as a single
<em>thing</em>, which means there’s no external way to observe any errors that
may occur.</p>

<p>If you construct a Promise chain that has no error handling in it, any
error anywhere in the chain will propagate indefinitely down the chain,
until observed (by registering a rejection handler at some step). So, in
that specific case, having a reference to the last promise in the
chain is enough (<code>p</code> in the following snippet), because you can register
a rejection handler there, and it will be notified of any propagated
errors:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__c1">// foo(..), STEP2(..) and STEP3(..) are</code>
<code class="epub__c1">// all promise-aware utilities</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">p</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">42</code> <code class="epub__p">)</code>
<code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">then</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">STEP2</code> <code class="epub__p">)</code>
<code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">then</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">STEP3</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>

<p>Although it may seem sneakily confusing, <code>p</code> here doesn’t point to the
first promise in the chain (the one from the <code>foo(42)</code> call), but
instead from the last promise, the one that comes from the <code>then(STEP3)</code>
call.</p>

<p>Also, no step in the Promise chain is observably doing its own error
handling. That means that you could then register a rejection error
handler on <code>p</code>, and it would be notified if any errors occur anywhere in
the chain:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting">p.catch( handleErrors );</pre>

<p>But if any step of the chain in fact does its own error handling
(perhaps hidden/abstracted away from what you can see), your
<code>handleErrors(..)</code> won’t be notified. This may be what you want—it
was, after all, a “handled rejection”—but it also may <em>not</em> be what
you want. The complete lack of ability to be notified (of “already
handled” rejection errors) is a limitation that restricts capabilities
in some use cases.</p>

<p>It’s basically the same limitation that exists with a <code>try..catch</code> that
can catch an exception and simply swallow it. So this isn’t a limitation
unique to Promises, but it <em>is</em> something we might wish to have a
workaround for.</p>

<p>Unfortunately, many times there is no reference kept for the
intermediate steps in a Promise-chain sequence, so without such
references, you cannot attach error handlers to reliably observe the
errors.</p>
</div></section>











































































</div></section>





















</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
