<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Promise Performance</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 3. Promises">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-3-promises">

























































































































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Promise Limitations"><div class="epub__sect1" id="promise-limitations">

















































































<section data-type="sect2" data-pdf-bookmark="Promise Performance"><div class="epub__sect2" id="promise-performance">
<h2>Promise Performance</h2>

<p>This particular limitation is both simple and complex.</p>

<p>Comparing how many pieces are moving with a basic callback-based async
task chain versus a Promise chain, it’s clear Promises have a fair bit
more going on, which means they are naturally at least a tiny bit
slower. Think back to just the simple list of trust guarantees that
Promises offer, as compared to the ad hoc solution code you’d have to
layer on top of callbacks to achieve the same protections.</p>

<p>More work to do, more guards to protect, means that Promises <em>are</em>
slower as compared to naked, untrustable callbacks. That much is
obvious, and probably simple to wrap your brain around.</p>

<p>But how much slower? Well…that’s actually proving to be an incredibly
difficult question to answer absolutely, across the board.</p>

<p>Frankly, it’s kind of an apples-to-oranges comparison, so it’s probably
the wrong question to ask. You should actually compare whether an ad hoc
callback system with all the same protections manually layered in is
faster than a Promise implementation.</p>

<p>If Promises have a legitimate performance limitation, it’s more that
they don’t really offer a line-item choice as to which trustability
protections you want/need or not—you get them all, always.</p>

<p>Nevertheless, if we grant that a Promise is generally a <em>little bit
slower</em> than its non-Promise, non-trustable callback equivalent—assuming there are places where you feel you can justify the lack of
trustability—does that mean that Promises should be avoided across
the board, as if your entire application is driven by nothing but
must-be-utterly-the-fastest code possible?</p>

<p>Sanity check: if your code is legitimately like that, is JavaScript
even the right language for such tasks? JavaScript can be optimized to
run applications very performantly (see Chapters 5 and 6). But is
obsessing over tiny performance tradeoffs with Promises, in light of all
the benefits they offer, really appropriate?</p>

<p>Another subtle issue is that Promises make <em>everything</em> async, which
means that some immediately (synchronously) complete steps still defer
advancement of the next step to a Job (see Chapter 1). That means that
it’s possible that a sequence of Promise tasks could complete
ever-so-slightly slower than the same sequence wired up with callbacks.</p>

<p>Of course, the question here is this: are these potential slips in tiny
fractions of performance worth all the other articulated benefits of
Promises we’ve laid out across this chapter?</p>

<p>My take is that in virtually all cases where you might think Promise
performance is slow enough to be concerned, it’s actually an
anti-pattern to optimize away the benefits of Promise trustability and
composability by avoiding them altogether.</p>

<p>Instead, you should default to using them across the code base, and then
profile and analyze your application’s hot (critical) paths. Are
Promises really a bottleneck, or are they just a theoretical slowdown?
Only then, armed with actual valid benchmarks (see Chapter 6) is it
responsible and prudent to factor out the Promises in just those
identified critical areas.</p>

<p>Promises are a little slower, but in exchange you’re getting a lot of
trustability, non-Zalgo predictability, and composability built in.
Maybe the limitation is not actually their performance, but your lack of
perception of their benefits?</p>
</div></section>





</div></section>





















</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
