<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Input and Output</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 4. Generators">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-4-generators">
















<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Breaking Run-to-Completion"><div class="epub__sect1" id="breaking-run-to-completion">








































<section data-type="sect2" data-pdf-bookmark="Input and Output"><div class="epub__sect2" id="input-and-output">
<h2>Input and Output</h2>

<p>A generator function is a special function with the new processing model
we just alluded to. But it’s still a function, which means it still has
some basic tenets that haven’t changed—namely, that it still accepts
arguments (aka input), and that it can still return a value (aka
output):</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__o">*</code><code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">x</code><code class="epub__p">,</code><code class="epub__nx">y</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__k">return</code> <code class="epub__nx">x</code> <code class="epub__o">*</code> <code class="epub__nx">y</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">it</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">6</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__mi">7</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">res</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">it</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">next</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>

<code class="epub__nx">res</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">value</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>      <code class="epub__c1">// 42</code></pre>

<p>We pass in the arguments <code>6</code> and <code>7</code> to <code>*foo(..)</code> as the parameters <code>x</code>
and <code>y</code>, respectively. And <code>*foo(..)</code> returns the value <code>42</code> back to the
calling code.</p>

<p>We now see a difference with how the generator is invoked compared to a
normal function. <code>foo(6,7)</code> obviously looks familiar. But subtly, the
<code>*foo(..)</code> generator hasn’t actually run yet as it would have with a
function.</p>

<p>Instead, we’re just creating an <em>iterator</em> object, which we assign to
the variable <code>it</code>, to control the <code>*foo(..)</code> generator. Then we call
<code>it.next()</code>, which instructs the <code>*foo(..)</code> generator to advance from
its current location, stopping either at the next <code>yield</code> or end of the
generator.</p>

<p>The result of that <code>next(..)</code> call is an object with a <code>value</code> property
on it holding whatever value (if anything) was returned from <code>*foo(..)</code>.
In other words, <code>yield</code> caused a value to be sent out from the generator
during the middle of its execution, kind of like an intermediate
<code>return</code>.</p>

<p>Again, it won’t be obvious yet why we need this whole indirect
<em>iterator</em> object to control the generator. We’ll get there, I
<em>promise</em>.</p>










<section data-type="sect3" data-pdf-bookmark="Iteration Messaging"><div class="epub__sect3" id="iteration-messaging">
<h3>Iteration Messaging</h3>

<p>In addition to generators accepting arguments and having return values,
there’s even more powerful and compelling input/output messaging
capability built into them, via <code>yield</code> and <code>next(..)</code>.</p>

<p>Consider:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__o">*</code><code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">x</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">y</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">x</code> <code class="epub__o">*</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__k">yield</code><code class="epub__p">);</code>
    <code class="epub__k">return</code> <code class="epub__nx">y</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">it</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">6</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// start `foo(..)`</code>
<code class="epub__nx">it</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">next</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">res</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">it</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">next</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">7</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__nx">res</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">value</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>      <code class="epub__c1">// 42</code></pre>

<p>First, we pass in <code>6</code> as the parameter <code>x</code>. Then we call <code>it.next()</code>,
and it starts up <code>*foo(..)</code>.</p>

<p>Inside <code>*foo(..)</code>, the <code>var y = x ..</code> statement starts to be processed,
but then it runs across a <code>yield</code> expression. At that point, it pauses
<code>*foo(..)</code> (in the middle of the assignment statement!), and essentially
requests the calling code to provide a result value for the <code>yield</code>
expression. Next, we call <code>it.next( 7 )</code>, which is passing the <code>7</code> value
back in to <em>be</em> that result of the paused <code>yield</code> expression.</p>

<p>So, at this point, the assignment statement is essentially
<code>var y = 6 * 7</code>. Now, <code>return y</code> returns that <code>42</code> value back as the
result of the <code>it.next( 7 )</code> call.</p>

<p>Notice something very important but also easily confusing, even to
seasoned JS developers: depending on your perspective, there’s a
mismatch between the <code>yield</code> and the <code>next(..)</code> call. In general, you’re
going to have one more <code>next(..)</code> call than you have <code>yield</code> statements—the preceding snippet has one <code>yield</code> and two <code>next(..)</code> calls.</p>

<p>Why the mismatch?</p>

<p>Because the first <code>next(..)</code> always starts a generator, and runs to the
first <code>yield</code>. But it’s the second <code>next(..)</code> call that fulfills the
first paused <code>yield</code> expression, and the third <code>next(..)</code> would fulfill
the second <code>yield</code>, and so on.</p>
</div></section>













<section data-type="sect3" data-pdf-bookmark="Tale of Two Questions"><div class="epub__sect3" id="tale-of-two-questions">
<h3>Tale of Two Questions</h3>

<p>Actually, which code you’re thinking about primarily will affect whether
there’s a perceived mismatch or not.</p>

<p>Consider only the generator code:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">y</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">x</code> <code class="epub__o">*</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__k">yield</code><code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__k">return</code> <code class="epub__nx">y</code><code class="epub__p">;</code></pre>

<p>This <em>first</em> <code>yield</code> is basically asking a question: “What value
should I insert here?”</p>

<p>Who’s going to answer that question? Well, the <em>first</em> <code>next()</code> has
already run to get the generator up to this point, so obviously <em>it</em>
can’t answer the question. So, the <em>second</em> <code>next(..)</code> call must answer
the question posed by the <em>first</em> <code>yield</code>.</p>

<p>See the mismatch—second-to-first?</p>

<p>But let’s flip our perspective. Let’s look at it not from the
generator’s point of view, but from the iterator’s point of view.</p>

<p>To properly illustrate this perspective, we also need to explain that
messages can go in both directions—<code>yield ..</code> as an expression can
send out messages in response to <code>next(..)</code> calls, and <code>next(..)</code> can
send values to a paused <code>yield</code> expression. Consider this slightly
adjusted code:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__o">*</code><code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">x</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">y</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">x</code> <code class="epub__o">*</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__k">yield</code> <code class="epub__s2">"Hello"</code><code class="epub__p">);</code>    <code class="epub__c1">// &lt;-- yield a value!</code>
    <code class="epub__k">return</code> <code class="epub__nx">y</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">it</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">6</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">res</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">it</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">next</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>    <code class="epub__c1">// first `next()`, don't pass anything</code>
<code class="epub__nx">res</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">value</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>              <code class="epub__c1">// "Hello"</code>

<code class="epub__nx">res</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">it</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">next</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">7</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>     <code class="epub__c1">// pass `7` to waiting `yield`</code>
<code class="epub__nx">res</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">value</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>              <code class="epub__c1">// 42</code></pre>

<p><code>yield ..</code> and <code>next(..)</code> pair together as a two-way message passing
system <em>during the execution of the generator</em>.</p>

<p>So, looking only at the <em>iterator</em> code:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">res</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">it</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">next</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>    <code class="epub__c1">// first `next()`, don't pass anything</code>
<code class="epub__nx">res</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">value</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>              <code class="epub__c1">// "Hello"</code>

<code class="epub__nx">res</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">it</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">next</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">7</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>     <code class="epub__c1">// pass `7` to waiting `yield`</code>
<code class="epub__nx">res</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">value</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>              <code class="epub__c1">// 42</code></pre>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>We don’t pass a value to the first <code>next()</code> call, and that’s on
purpose. Only a paused <code>yield</code> could accept such a value passed by a
<code>next(..)</code>, and at the beginning of the generator when we call the first
<code>next()</code>, there is no paused <code>yield</code> to accept such a value. The specification and all
compliant browsers just silently discard anything passed to the first
<code>next()</code>. It’s still a bad idea to pass a value, as you’re just creating
silently failing code that’s confusing. So, always start a generator
with an argument-free <code>next()</code>.</p>
</div>

<p>The first <code>next()</code> call (with nothing passed to it) is basically <em>asking
a question</em>: “What <em>next</em> value does the <code>*foo(..)</code> generator have to
give me?” And who answers this question? The first <code>yield "hello"</code>
expression.</p>

<p>See? No mismatch there.</p>

<p>Depending on <em>who</em> you think about asking the question, there is either
a mismatch between the <code>yield</code> and <code>next(..)</code> calls, or not.</p>

<p>But wait! There’s still an extra <code>next()</code> compared to the number of
<code>yield</code> statements. So, that final <code>it.next(7)</code> call is again asking the
question about what <em>next</em> value the generator will produce. But there’s
no more <code>yield</code> statements left to answer, is there? So who answers?</p>

<p>The <code>return</code> statement answers the question!</p>

<p>And if there is no <code>return</code> in your generator—<code>return</code> is certainly
not any more required in generators than in regular functions—there’s
always an assumed/implicit <code>return;</code> (aka <code>return undefined;</code>), which
serves the purpose of default answering the question <em>posed</em> by the
final <code>it.next(7)</code> call.</p>

<p>These questions and answers—the two-way message passing with <code>yield</code>
and <code>next(..)</code>—are quite powerful, but it’s not obvious at all how
these mechanisms are connected to async flow control. We’re getting
there!</p>
</div></section>



</div></section>



















</div></section>























































































































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
