<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Breaking Run-to-Completion</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 4. Generators">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-4-generators">
















<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Breaking Run-to-Completion"><div class="epub__sect1" id="breaking-run-to-completion">
<h1>Breaking Run-to-Completion</h1>

<p>In Chapter 1, we explained an expectation that JS developers almost
universally rely on in their code: once a function starts executing, it
runs until it completes, and no other code can interrupt and run in
between.</p>

<p>As bizarre as it may seem, ES6 introduces a new type of function that
does not behave with the run-to-completion behavior. This new type of
function is called a generator.</p>

<p class="epub__pagebreak-before">To understand the implications, let’s consider this example:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">x</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__mi">1</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>

<code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">x</code><code class="epub__o">++</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">bar</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>              <code class="epub__c1">// &lt;-- what about this line?</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"x:"</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__nx">x</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">bar</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">x</code><code class="epub__o">++</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>                  <code class="epub__c1">// x: 3</code></pre>

<p>In this example, we know for sure that <code>bar()</code> runs in between <code>x++</code> and
<code>console.log(x)</code>. But what if <code>bar()</code> wasn’t there? Obviously the result
would be <code>2</code> instead of <code>3</code>.</p>

<p>Now let’s twist your brain. What if <code>bar()</code> wasn’t present, but it could
still somehow run between the <code>x++</code> and <code>console.log(x)</code> statements? How
would that be possible?</p>

<p>In <em>preemptive</em> multithreaded languages, it would essentially be
possible for <code>bar()</code> to interrupt and run at exactly the right moment
between those two statements. But JS is not preemptive, nor is it
(currently) multithreaded. And yet, a <em>cooperative</em> form of this
interruption (concurrency) is possible, if <code>foo()</code> itself could
somehow indicate a pause at that part in the code.</p>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>I use the word “cooperative” not only because of the connection
to classical concurrency terminology (see Chapter 1), but because as
you’ll see in the next snippet, the ES6 syntax for indicating a pause
point in code is <code>yield</code>—suggesting a politely cooperative yielding
of control.</p>
</div>

<p>Here’s the ES6 code to accomplish such cooperative concurrency:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">x</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__mi">1</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>

<code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__o">*</code><code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">x</code><code class="epub__o">++</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
    <code class="epub__k">yield</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// pause!</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"x:"</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__nx">x</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">bar</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">x</code><code class="epub__o">++</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code></pre>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>You will likely see most other JS documentation/code that will
format a generator declaration as <code>function* foo() { .. }</code> instead of as
I’ve done here with <code>function *foo() { .. }</code>—the only difference
being the stylistic positioning of the <code>*</code>. The two forms are
functionally/syntactically identical, as is a third
<code>function*foo() { .. }</code> (no space) form. There are arguments for both
styles, but I basically prefer <code>function *foo..</code> because it then matches
when I reference a generator in writing with <code>*foo()</code>. If I said only
<code>foo()</code>, you wouldn’t know as clearly if I was talking about a generator
or a regular function. It’s purely a stylistic preference.</p>
</div>

<p>Now, how can we run the code in that previous snippet such that <code>bar()</code>
executes at the point of the <code>yield</code> inside of <code>*foo()</code>?</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__c1">// construct an iterator `it` to control the generator</code>
<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">it</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// start `foo()` here!</code>
<code class="epub__nx">it</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">next</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>
<code class="epub__nx">x</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>                      <code class="epub__c1">// 2</code>
<code class="epub__nx">bar</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>
<code class="epub__nx">x</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>                      <code class="epub__c1">// 3</code>
<code class="epub__nx">it</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">next</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>              <code class="epub__c1">// x: 3</code></pre>

<p>OK, there’s quite a bit of new and potentially confusing stuff in those
two code snippets, so we’ve got plenty to wade through. But before we
explain the different mechanics/syntax with ES6 generators, let’s walk
through the behavior flow:</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p>The <code>it = foo()</code> operation does <em>not</em> execute the <code>*foo()</code> generator
yet, but it merely constructs an <em>iterator</em> that will control its
execution. More on <em>iterators</em> in a bit.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The first <code>it.next()</code> starts the <code>*foo()</code> generator, and runs the
<span class="epub__keep-together"><code>x++</code></span> on the first line of <code>*foo()</code>.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p><code>*foo()</code> pauses at the <code>yield</code> statement, at which point that first
<code>it.next()</code> call finishes. At the moment, <code>*foo()</code> is still running and
active, but it’s in a paused state.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>We inspect the value of <code>x</code>, and it’s now <code>2</code>.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>We call <code>bar()</code>, which increments <code>x</code> again with <code>x++</code>.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>We inspect the value of <code>x</code> again, and it’s now <code>3</code>.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>The final <code>it.next()</code> call resumes the <code>*foo()</code> generator from where
it was paused, and runs the <code>console.log(..)</code> statement, which uses the
current value of <code>x</code> of <code>3</code>.</p>
</li>

</ol>

<p>Clearly, <code>foo()</code> started, but did <em>not</em> run-to-completion—it paused
at the <code>yield</code>. We resumed <code>foo()</code> later, and let it finish, but that
wasn’t even required.</p>

<p>So, a generator is a special kind of function that can start and stop
one or more times, and doesn’t necessarily ever have to finish. While it
won’t be terribly obvious yet why that’s so powerful, as we go
throughout the rest of this chapter, that will be one of the fundamental
building blocks we use to construct generators-as-async-flow-control as
a pattern for our code.</p>




























</div></section>























































































































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
