<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Review</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 4. Generators">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-4-generators">
































































































































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Review"><div class="epub__sect1" id="review_ch04">
<h1>Review</h1>

<p>Generators are a new ES6 function type that does not run-to-completion
like normal functions. Instead, the generator can be paused in
mid-completion (entirely preserving its state), and it can later be
resumed from where it left off.</p>

<p>This pause/resume interchange is cooperative rather than preemptive,
which means that the generator has the sole capability to pause itself,
using the <code>yield</code> keyword, and yet the <em>iterator</em> that controls the
generator has the sole capability (via <code>next(..)</code>) to resume the
generator.</p>

<p>The <code>yield</code> / <code>next(..)</code> duality is not just a control mechanism, it’s
actually a two-way message passing mechanism. A <code>yield ..</code> expression
essentially pauses waiting for a value, and the next <code>next(..)</code> call
passes a value (or implicit <code>undefined</code>) back to that paused <code>yield</code>
expression.</p>

<p>The key benefit of generators related to async flow control is that the
code inside a generator expresses a sequence of steps for the task in a
naturally sync/sequential fashion. The trick is that we essentially hide
potential asynchrony behind the <code>yield</code> keyword—moving the asynchrony
to the code where the generator’s <em>iterator</em> is controlled.</p>

<p>In other words, generators preserve a sequential, synchronous, blocking
code pattern for async code, which lets our brains reason about the code
much more naturally, addressing one of the two key drawbacks of
callback-based async.</p>
</div></section>







</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
