<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 5. Program Performance</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 5. Program Performance">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-5-program-performance">
<h1><span class="epub__label">Chapter 5. </span>Program Performance</h1>


<p>This book so far has been all about how to leverage asynchrony patterns
more effectively. But we haven’t directly addressed why asynchrony
really matters to JS. The most obvious explicit reason is <em>performance</em>.</p>

<p>For example, if you have two Ajax requests to make, and they’re
independent, but you need to wait on them both to finish before doing
the next task, you have two options for modeling that interaction:
serial and concurrent.</p>

<p>You could make the first request and wait to start the second request
until the first finishes. Or, as we’ve seen both with promises and
generators, you could make both requests in parallel, and ask the
gate to wait on both of them before moving on.</p>

<p>Clearly, the latter is usually going to be more performant than the
former. And better performance generally leads to better user
experience.</p>

<p>It’s even possible that asynchrony (interleaved concurrency) can improve
just the perception of performance, even if the overall program still
takes the same amount of time to complete. User perception of
performance is every bit—if not more!—as important as actual
measurable performance.</p>

<p>We want to now move beyond localized asynchrony patterns to talk about
some bigger picture performance details at the program level.</p>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>You may be wondering about micro-performance issues, like if
<code>a++</code> or <code>++a</code> is faster. We’ll look at those sorts of performance
details in Chapter 6.</p>
</div>
























































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
