<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Data Transfer</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 5. Program Performance">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-5-program-performance">





















<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Web Workers"><div class="epub__sect1" id="web-workers">









































































<section data-type="sect2" data-pdf-bookmark="Data Transfer"><div class="epub__sect2" id="data-transfer">
<h2>Data Transfer</h2>

<p>You may notice a common characteristic of most of those uses, which is
that they require a large amount of information to be transferred across
the barrier between threads using the event mechanism, perhaps in both
directions.</p>

<p>In the early days of Workers, serializing all data to a string value was
the only option. In addition to the speed penalty of the two-way
serializations, the other major negative was that the data was being
copied, which meant a doubling of memory usage (and the subsequent churn
of garbage collection).</p>

<p>Thankfully, we now have a few better options.</p>

<p>If you pass an object, a <em>structured clone algorithm</em>
is used to copy/duplicate the object on the other side. This algorithm
is fairly sophisticated and can even handle duplicating objects with
circular references. The to-string/from-string performance penalty is
not paid, but we still have duplication of memory using this approach.
There is support for this in IE10 and above, as well as all the other
major browsers.</p>

<p>An even better option, especially for larger data sets, is <em>Transferable
Objects</em>.
What happens is that the object’s ownership is transferred, but the
data itself is not moved. Once you transfer away an object to a Worker,
it’s empty or inaccessible in the the originating location—that
eliminates the hazards of threaded programming over a shared scope. Of
course, transfer of ownership can go in both directions.</p>

<p>There really isn’t much you need to do to opt into a Transferable
Object; any data structure that implements the <code>Transferable</code> interface will
automatically be transferred this way (supported in Firefox &amp; Chrome).</p>

<p>For example, typed arrays like <code>Uint8Array</code> (see the <em>ES6 &amp; Beyond</em>
title of this series) are Transferables. This is how you’d send a
Transferable Object using <code>postMessage(..)</code>:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__c1">// `foo` is a `Uint8Array` for instance</code>

<code class="epub__nx">postMessage</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">buffer</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__p">[</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">buffer</code> <code class="epub__p">]</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>

<p>The first parameter is the raw buffer and the second parameter is a list
of what to transfer.</p>

<p>Browsers that don’t support Transferable Objects simply degrade to
structured cloning, which means performance reduction rather than
outright feature breakage.</p>
</div></section>

































</div></section>

















































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
