<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Web Workers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 5. Program Performance">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-5-program-performance">





















<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Web Workers"><div class="epub__sect1" id="web-workers">
<h1>Web Workers</h1>

<p>If you have processing-intensive tasks but you don’t want them to run on
the main thread (which may slow down the browser/UI), you might have
wished that JavaScript could operate in a multithreaded manner.</p>

<p>In Chapter 1, we talked in detail about how JavaScript is single
threaded. And that’s still true. But a single thread isn’t the only way
to organize the execution of your program.</p>

<p>Imagine splitting your program into two pieces, and running one of those
pieces on the main UI thread, and running the other piece on an entirely
separate thread.</p>

<p>What kinds of concerns would such an architecture bring up?</p>

<p>For one, you’d want to know if running on a separate thread meant that
it ran in parallel (on systems with multiple CPUs/cores) such that a
long-running process on that second thread would <em>not</em> block the main
program thread. Otherwise, “virtual threading” wouldn’t be of much
benefit over what we already have in JS with async concurrency.</p>

<p>And you’d want to know if these two pieces of the program have access to
the same shared scope/resources. If they do, then you have all the
questions that multithreaded languages (Java, C++, etc.) deal with, such
as needing cooperative or preemptive locking (mutexes, etc.). That’s a
lot of extra work, and shouldn’t be undertaken lightly.</p>

<p>Alternatively, you’d want to know how these two pieces could
communicate if they couldn’t share scope/resources.</p>

<p>All these are great questions to consider as we explore a feature added
to the web platform circa HTML5 called Web Workers. This is a feature
of the browser (aka host environment) and actually has almost nothing to
do with the JS language itself. That is, JavaScript does not <em>currently</em>
have any features that support threaded execution.</p>

<p>But an environment like your browser can easily provide multiple
instances of the JavaScript engine, each on its own thread, and let you
run a different program in each thread. Each of those separate threaded
pieces of your program is called a (Web) Worker. This type of
parallelism is called <em>task parallelism</em>, as the emphasis is on
splitting up chunks of your program to run in parallel.</p>

<p>From your main JS program (or another Worker), you instantiate a Worker
like so:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">w1</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__k">new</code> <code class="epub__nx">Worker</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"http://some.url.1/mycoolworker.js"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>

<p>The URL should point to the location of a JS file (not an HTML page!)
which is intended to be loaded into a Worker. The browser will then spin
up a separate thread and let that file run as an independent program in
that thread.</p>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>The kind of Worker created with such a URL is called a
Dedicated Worker. But instead of providing a URL to an external file,
you can also create an Inline Worker by providing a Blob URL (another
HTML5 feature); essentially it’s an inline file stored in a single
(binary) value. However, Blobs are beyond the scope of what we’ll
discuss here.</p>
</div>

<p>Workers do not share any scope or resources with each other or the main
program—that would bring all the nightmares of theaded programming to
the forefront—but instead have a basic event messaging mechanism
connecting them.</p>

<p>The <code>w1</code> Worker object is an event listener and trigger, which lets you
subscribe to events sent by the Worker as well as send events to the
Worker.</p>

<p>Here’s how to listen for events (actually, the fixed <code>"message"</code> event):</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__nx">w1</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">addEventListener</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"message"</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">evt</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// evt.data</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>

<p>And you can send the <code>"message"</code> event to the Worker:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__nx">w1</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">postMessage</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"something cool to say"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>

<p class="epub__pagebreak-before">Inside the Worker, the messaging is totally symmetrical:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__c1">// "mycoolworker.js"</code>

<code class="epub__nx">addEventListener</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"message"</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">evt</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// evt.data</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__nx">postMessage</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"a really cool reply"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>

<p>Notice that a dedicated Worker is in a one-to-one relationship with the
program that created it. That is, the <code>"message"</code> event doesn’t need any
disambiguation here, because we’re sure that it could only have come
from this one-to-one relationship—it came from either the Worker or
the main page.</p>

<p>Usually the main page application creates the Workers, but a Worker can
instantiate its own child Worker(s)—known as subworkers—as
necessary. Sometimes this is useful to delegate such details to a sort
of “master” Worker that spawns other Workers to process parts of a task.
Unfortunately, at the time of this writing, Chrome still does not
support subworkers, while Firefox does.</p>

<p>To kill a Worker immediately from the program that created it, call
<code>terminate()</code> on the Worker object (like <code>w1</code> in the previous snippets).
Abruptly terminating a Worker thread does not give it any chance to
finish up its work or clean up any resources. It’s akin to you closing a
browser tab to kill a page.</p>

<p>If you have two or more pages (or multiple tabs with the same page!) in the
browser that try to create a Worker from the same file URL, those will
actually end up as completely separate Workers. Shortly, we’ll discuss a
way to share a Worker.</p>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>It may seem like a malicious or ignorant JS program could easily
perform a denial-of-service attack on a system by spawning hundreds of
Workers, seemingly each with their own thread. While it’s true that it’s
somewhat of a guarantee that a Worker will end up on a separate thread,
this guarantee is not unlimited. The system is free to decide how many
actual threads/CPUs/cores it really wants to create. There’s no way to
predict or guarantee how many you’ll have access to, though many people
assume it’s at least as many as the number of CPUs/cores available. I
think the safest assumption is that there’s at least one other thread
besides the main UI thread, but that’s about it.</p>
</div>
























































</div></section>

















































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
