<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Polyfilling Web Workers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 5. Program Performance">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-5-program-performance">





















<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Web Workers"><div class="epub__sect1" id="web-workers">





































































































<section data-type="sect2" data-pdf-bookmark="Polyfilling Web Workers"><div class="epub__sect2" id="polyfilling-web-workers">
<h2>Polyfilling Web Workers</h2>

<p>Web Workers are very attractive performance-wise for running JS programs
in parallel. However, you may be in a position where your code needs to
run in older browsers that lack support. Because Workers are an API and
not a syntax, they can be polyfilled, to an extent.</p>

<p>If a browser doesn’t support Workers, there’s simply no way to fake
multithreading from the performance perspective. Iframes are commonly
thought of to provide a parallel environment, but in all modern browsers
they actually run on the same thread as the main page, so they’re not
sufficient for faking parallelism.</p>

<p>As we detailed in Chapter 1, JS’s asynchronicity (not parallelism) comes
from the event loop queue, so you can force faked Workers to be
asynchronous using timers (<code>setTimeout(..)</code>, etc.). Then you just need
to provide a polyfill for the Worker API. There are some listed on the Modernizr GitHub page,
but frankly none of them look great.</p>

<p>I’ve written a sketch of a polyfill for <code>Worker</code> on this gist. It’s basic, but
it should get the job done for simple <code>Worker</code> support, given that the
two-way messaging works correctly as well as <code>"onerror"</code> handling. You
could probably also extend it with more features, such as <code>terminate()</code>
or faked Shared Workers, as you see fit.</p>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>You can’t fake synchronous blocking, so this polyfill just
disallows use of <code>importScripts(..)</code>. Another option might have been to
parse and transform the Worker’s code (once Ajax loaded) to handle
rewriting to some asynchronous form of an <code>importScripts(..)</code> polyfill,
perhaps with a promise-aware interface.</p>
</div>
</div></section>





</div></section>

















































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
