<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Worker Environment</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 5. Program Performance">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-5-program-performance">





















<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Web Workers"><div class="epub__sect1" id="web-workers">



























































<section data-type="sect2" data-pdf-bookmark="Worker Environment"><div class="epub__sect2" id="worker-environment">
<h2>Worker Environment</h2>

<p>Inside the Worker, you do not have access to any of the main program’s
resources. That means you cannot access any of its global variables, nor
can you access the page’s DOM or other resources. Remember: it’s a
totally separate thread.</p>

<p>You can, however, perform network operations (Ajax, WebSockets) and set
timers. Also, the Worker has access to its own copy of several important
global variables/features, including <code>navigator</code>, <code>location</code>, <code>JSON</code>,
and <code>applicationCache</code>.</p>

<p>You can also load extra JS scripts into your Worker, using
<code>importScripts(..)</code>:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__c1">// inside the Worker</code>
<code class="epub__nx">importScripts</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"foo.js"</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__s2">"bar.js"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>

<p>These scripts are loaded synchronously, which means the
<code>importScripts(..)</code> call will block the rest of the Worker’s execution
until the file(s) are finished loading and executing.</p>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>There have also been some discussions about exposing the
<code>&lt;canvas&gt;</code> API to Workers, which combined with having canvases be
Transferables (see “Data Transfer”), would allow Workers to
perform more sophisticated off-thread graphics processing, which can be
useful for high-performance gaming (WebGL) and other similar
applications. Although this doesn’t exist yet in any browsers, it’s
likely to happen in the near future.</p>
</div>

<p>What are some common uses for Web Workers?</p>

<ul>
<li>
<p>Processing intensive math calculations</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Sorting large data sets</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Data operations (compression, audio analysis, image pixel
manipulations, etc.)</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>High-traffic network communications</p>
</li>
</ul>
</div></section>















































</div></section>

















































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
