<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Review</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 5. Program Performance">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-5-program-performance">































































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Review"><div class="epub__sect1" id="review_ch05">
<h1>Review</h1>

<p>The first four chapters of this book are based on the premise that async
coding patterns give you the ability to write more performant code,
which is generally a very important improvement. But async behavior only
gets you so far, because it’s still fundamentally bound to a single
event loop thread.</p>

<p>So in this chapter we’ve covered several program-level mechanisms for
improving performance even further.</p>

<p>Web Workers let you run a JS file (aka program) in a separate thread
using async events to message between the threads. They’re wonderful for
offloading long-running or resource-intensive tasks to a different
thread, leaving the main UI thread more responsive.</p>

<p>SIMD proposes to map CPU-level parallel math operations to JavaScript
APIs for high-performance data-parallel operations, like number
processing on large data sets.</p>

<p>Finally, asm.js describes a small subset of JavaScript that avoids the
hard-to-optimize parts of JS (like garbage collection and coercion) and
lets the JS engine recognize and run such code through aggressive
optimizations. asm.js could be hand authored, but that’s extremely
tedious and error prone, akin to hand authoring assembly language (hence
the name). Instead, the main intent is that asm.js would be a good
target for cross-compilation from other highly optimized program
languages—for example, Emscripten transpiling C/C++ to JavaScript.</p>

<p>While not covered explicitly in this chapter, there are even more
radical ideas under very early discussion for JavaScript, including
approximations of direct threaded functionality (not just hidden behind
data structure APIs). Whether that happens explicitly, or we just see
more parallelism creep into JS behind the scenes, the future of more
optimized program-level performance in JS looks really promising.</p>
</div></section>







</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
