<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Benchmarking</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 6. Benchmarking &amp; Tuning">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-6-benchmarking-tuning">
















<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Benchmarking"><div class="epub__sect1" id="benchmarking">
<h1>Benchmarking</h1>

<p>OK, time to start dispelling some misconceptions. I’d wager the vast
majority of JS developers, if asked to benchmark the speed (execution
time) of a certain operation, would initially go about it something like
this:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">start</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__k">new</code> <code class="epub__nb">Date</code><code class="epub__p">()).</code><code class="epub__nx">getTime</code><code class="epub__p">();</code> <code class="epub__c1">// or `Date.now()`</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// do some operation</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">end</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__k">new</code> <code class="epub__nb">Date</code><code class="epub__p">()).</code><code class="epub__nx">getTime</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>

<code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"Duration:"</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">end</code> <code class="epub__o">-</code> <code class="epub__nx">start</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>

<p>Raise your hand if that’s roughly what came to your mind. Yep, I thought
so. There’s a lot wrong with this approach, but don’t feel bad; we’ve
all been there.</p>

<p>What did that measurement tell you, exactly? Understanding what it does
and doesn’t say about the execution time of the operation in question is
key to learning how to appropriately benchmark performance in
JavaScript.</p>

<p>If the duration reported is <code>0</code>, you may be tempted to believe that it
took less than a millisecond. But that’s not very accurate. Some
platforms don’t have single millisecond precision, but instead only
update the timer in larger increments. For example, older versions of
windows (and thus IE) had only 15ms precision, which means the operation
has to take at least that long for anything other than <code>0</code> to be
reported!</p>

<p>Moreover, whatever duration is reported, the only thing you really know
is that the operation took approximately that long on that exact single
run. You have near-zero confidence that it will always run at that
speed. You have no idea if the engine or system had some sort of
interference at that exact moment, and that at other times the operation
could run faster.</p>

<p>What if the duration reported is <code>4</code>? Are you more sure it took about
four milliseconds? Nope. It might have taken less time, and there may
have been some other delay in getting either <code>start</code> or <code>end</code>
timestamps.</p>

<p>More troublingly, you also don’t know that the circumstances of this
operation test aren’t overly optimistic. It’s possible that the JS
engine figured out a way to optimize your isolated test case, but in a
more real program such optimization would be diluted or impossible, such
that the operation would run slower than your test.</p>

<p>So…what do we know? Unfortunately, with those realizations stated, we know very little. Something of such low confidence isn’t even
remotely good enough to build your determinations on. Your benchmark
is basically useless. And worse, it’s dangerous in that it implies false
confidence, not just to you but also to others who don’t think
critically about the conditions that led to those results.</p>








<section data-type="sect2" data-pdf-bookmark="Repetition"><div class="epub__sect2" id="repetition">
<h2>Repetition</h2>

<p>“OK,” you now say, “just put a loop around it so the whole test takes
longer.” If you repeat an operation 100 times, and that whole loop
reportedly takes a total of 137ms, then you can just divide by 100 and
get an average duration of 1.37ms for each operation, right?</p>

<p>Well, not exactly.</p>

<p>A straight mathematical average by itself is definitely not sufficient
for making judgments about performance which you plan to extrapolate to
the breadth of your entire application. With a hundred iterations, even
a couple of outliers (high or low) can skew the average, and then when
you apply that conclusion repeatedly, you even further inflate the skew
beyond credulity.</p>

<p>Instead of just running for a fixed number of iterations, you can
instead choose to run the loop of tests until a certain amount of time
has passed. That might be more reliable, but how do you decide how long
to run? You might guess that it should be some multiple of how long your
operation should take to run once. Wrong.</p>

<p>Actually, the length of time to repeat across should be based on the
accuracy of the timer you’re using, specifically to minimize the chances
of inaccuracy. The less precise your timer, the longer you need to run
to make sure you’ve minimized the error percentage. A 15ms timer is
pretty bad for accurate benchmarking; to minimize its uncertainty (aka
error rate) to less than 1%, you need to run your each cycle of test
iterations for 750ms. A 1ms timer needs a cycle to run for only 50ms to
get the same confidence.</p>

<p>But then, that’s just a single sample. To be sure you’re factoring out
the skew, you’ll want lots of samples to average across. You’ll also
want to understand something about just how slow the worst sample is,
how fast the best sample is, how far apart those best and worse cases
were, and so on. You’ll want to know not just a number that tells you
how fast something ran, but also to have some quantifiable measure of
how trustable that number is.</p>

<p>Also, you probably want to combine these different techniques (as well
as others), so that you get the best balance of all the possible
approaches.</p>

<p>That’s all the bare minimum just to get started. If you’ve been approaching
performance benchmarking in a less serious manner than what I just
glossed over, well…<em>you don’t know: proper benchmarking</em>.</p>
</div></section>













<section data-type="sect2" data-pdf-bookmark="Benchmark.js"><div class="epub__sect2" id="benchmark.js">
<h2>Benchmark.js</h2>

<p>Any relevant and reliable benchmark should be based on statistically
sound practices. I am not going to write a chapter on statistics here,
so I’ll hand wave around some terms: standard deviation, variance,
margin of error. If you don’t know what those terms really mean—I
took a stats class back in college and I’m still a little fuzzy on them—you are not actually qualified to write your own benchmarking logic.</p>

<p>Luckily, smart folks like John-David Dalton and Mathias Bynens do
understand these concepts, and wrote a statistically sound benchmarking
tool called Benchmark.js. So I can end the
suspense by simply saying: “just use that tool.”</p>

<p>I won’t repeat their whole documentation for how Benchmark.js works;
they have fantastic API docs you should
read. Also there are some great writeups on more of the details and methodology here and here.</p>

<p>But just for quick illustration purposes, here’s how you could use
Benchmark.js to run a quick performance test:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// operation(s) to test</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">bench</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__k">new</code> <code class="epub__nx">Benchmark</code><code class="epub__p">(</code>
    <code class="epub__s2">"foo test"</code><code class="epub__p">,</code>             <code class="epub__c1">// test name</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">,</code>                    <code class="epub__c1">// function to test (just contents)</code>
    <code class="epub__p">{</code>
        <code class="epub__c1">// ..               // optional extra options (see docs)</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code>
<code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__nx">bench</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">hz</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>                   <code class="epub__c1">// number of operations per second</code>
<code class="epub__nx">bench</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">stats</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">moe</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>            <code class="epub__c1">// margin of error</code>
<code class="epub__nx">bench</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">stats</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">variance</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>       <code class="epub__c1">// variance across samples</code>
<code class="epub__c1">// ..</code></pre>

<p>There’s <em>lots</em> more to learn about using Benchmark.js besides this
glance I’m including here. But the point is that it’s handling all of
the complexities of setting up a fair, reliable, and valid performance
benchmark for a given piece of JavaScript code. If you’re going to try
to test and benchmark your code, this library is the first place you
should turn.</p>

<p>We’re showing here the usage to test a single operation like X, but it’s
fairly common that you want to compare X to Y. This is easy to do by
simply setting up two different tests in a <em>suite</em> (a Benchmark.js
organizational feature). Then, you run them head-to-head, and compare
the statistics to conclude whether X or Y was faster.</p>

<p>Benchmark.js can of course be used to test JavaScript in a browser (see
“jsPerf.com” later in this chapter), but it can also run in
nonbrowser environments (Node.js, etc.).</p>

<p>One largely untapped potential use-case for Benchmark.js is to use it in
your Dev or QA environments to run automated performance regression
tests against critical path parts of your application’s JavaScript.
Similar to how you might run unit test suites before deployment, you can
also compare the performance against previous benchmarks to monitor if
you are improving or degrading application performance.</p>










<section data-type="sect3" data-pdf-bookmark="Setup/Teardown"><div class="epub__sect3" id="setupteardown">
<h3>Setup/Teardown</h3>

<p>In the previous code snippet, we glossed over the “extra options”
<code>{ .. }</code> object. But there are two options we should discuss: <code>setup</code>
and <code>teardown</code>.</p>

<p>These two options let you define functions to be called before and after
your test case runs.</p>

<p>It’s incredibly important to understand that your <code>setup</code> and <code>teardown</code>
code <em>does not run for each test iteration</em>. The best way to think about
it is that there’s an outer loop (repeating cycles), and an inner loop
(repeating test iterations). <code>setup</code> and <code>teardown</code> are run at the
beginning and end of each <em>outer</em> loop (aka cycle) iteration, but not
inside the inner loop.</p>

<p>Why does this matter? Let’s imagine you have a test case that looks like
this:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">+</code> <code class="epub__s2">"w"</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__nx">b</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">charAt</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">1</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>

<p>Then, you set up your test <code>setup</code> as follows:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__s2">"x"</code><code class="epub__p">;</code></pre>

<p>Your temptation is probably to believe that <code>a</code> is starting out as <code>"x"</code>
for each test iteration.</p>

<p>But it’s not! It’s starting <code>a</code> at <code>"x"</code> for each test cycle, and then
your repeated <code>+ "w"</code> concatenations will be making a larger and larger
<code>a</code> value, even though you’re only ever accessing the character <code>"w"</code> at
the <code>1</code> position.</p>

<p>Where this most commonly bites you is when you make side effect changes
to something like the DOM, like appending a child element. You may think
your parent element is set as empty each time, but it’s actually getting
lots of elements added, and that can significantly sway the results of
your tests.</p>
</div></section>



</div></section>





</div></section>



























































































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
