<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Context Is King</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 6. Benchmarking &amp; Tuning">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-6-benchmarking-tuning">






























<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Context Is King"><div class="epub__sect1" id="context-is-king">
<h1>Context Is King</h1>

<p>Don’t forget to check the context of a particular performance benchmark,
especially a comparison between X and Y tasks. Just because your test
reveals that X is faster than Y doesn’t mean that the conclusion “X is
faster than Y” is actually relevant.</p>

<p>For example, let’s say a performance test reveals that X runs 10,000,000
operations per second, and Y runs at 8,000,000 operations per second.
You could claim that Y is 20% slower than X, and you’d be mathematically
correct, but your assertion doesn’t hold as much water as you’d think.</p>

<p>Let’s think about the results more critically: 10,000,000 operations per
second is 10,000 operations per millisecond, and 10 operations per
microsecond. In other words, a single operation takes 0.1 microseconds,
or 100 nanoseconds. It’s hard to fathom just how small 100ns is, but for
comparison, it’s often cited that the human eye isn’t generally capable
of distinguishing anything less than 100ms, which is one million times
slower than the 100ns speed of the X operation.</p>

<p>Even recent scientific studies showing that maybe the brain can process
as quick as 13ms (about 8x faster than previously asserted) would mean
that X is still running 125,000 times faster than the human brain can
perceive a distinct thing happening. <em>X is going really, really fast.</em></p>

<p>But more importantly, let’s talk about the difference between X and Y,
the 2,000,000 operations per second difference. If X takes 100ns, and Y
takes 80ns, the difference is 20ns, which in the best case is still one
650-thousandth of the interval the human brain can perceive.</p>

<p>What’s my point? None of this performance difference matters, at all!</p>

<p>But wait, what if this operation is going to happen a whole bunch of
times in a row? Then the difference could add up, right?</p>

<p>OK, so what we’re asking then is, how likely is it that operation X is
going to be run over and over again, one right after the other, and that
this has to happen 650,000 times just to get a sliver of a hope the
human brain could perceive it. More likely, it’d have to happen
5,000,000 to 10,000,000 times together in a tight loop to even approach
relevance.</p>

<p>While the computer scientist in you might protest that this is possible,
the louder voice of realism in you should sanity check just how likely
or unlikely that really is. Even if it is relevant in rare occasions,
it’s irrelevant in most situations.</p>

<p>The vast majority of your benchmark results on tiny operations—like
the <code>++x</code> vs <code>x++</code> myth—are just totally bogus for supporting the
conclusion that X should be favored over Y on a performance basis.</p>








<section data-type="sect2" data-pdf-bookmark="Engine Optimizations"><div class="epub__sect2" id="engine-optimizations">
<h2>Engine Optimizations</h2>

<p>You simply cannot reliably extrapolate that if X was 10 microseconds
faster than Y in your isolated test, that means X is always faster than
Y and should always be used. That’s not how performance works. It’s
vastly more complicated.</p>

<p>For example, let’s imagine (purely hypothetical) that you test some
microperformance behavior such as comparing:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">twelve</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__s2">"12"</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__s2">"foo"</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// test 1</code>
<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">X1</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nb">parseInt</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">twelve</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">X2</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nb">parseInt</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// test 2</code>
<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">Y1</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nb">Number</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">twelve</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">Y2</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nb">Number</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>

<p>If you understand what <code>parseInt(..)</code> does compared to <code>Number(..)</code>, you
might intuit that <code>parseInt(..)</code> potentially has more work to do,
especially in the <code>foo</code> case. Or you might intuit that they should have
the same amount of work to do in the <code>foo</code> case, as both should be able
to stop at the first character, <code>f</code>.</p>

<p>Which intuition is correct? I honestly don’t know. But I’ll make the
case it doesn’t matter what your intuition is. What might the results be
when you test it? Again, I’m making up a pure hypothetical here; I
haven’t actually tried testing this, nor do I care to.</p>

<p>Let’s pretend the test comes back that <code>X</code> and <code>Y</code> are statistically
identical. Have you then confirmed your intuition about the <code>f</code>
character thing? Nope.</p>

<p>It’s possible in our hypothetical that the engine might recognize that
the variables <code>twelve</code> and <code>foo</code> are being used in only one place in
each test, and so it might decide to inline those values. Then it may
realize that <code>Number( "12" )</code> can just be replaced by <code>12</code>. And maybe it
comes to the same conclusion with <code>parseInt(..)</code>, or maybe not.</p>

<p>Or an engine’s dead-code removal heuristic could kick in, and it could
realize that variables <code>X</code> and <code>Y</code> aren’t being used, so declaring them
is irrelevant, so it doesn’t end up doing anything at all in either
test.</p>

<p>And all that’s just made with the mindset of assumptions about a single
test run. Modern engines are fantastically more complicated than what
we’re intuiting here. They do all sorts of tricks, like tracing and
tracking how a piece of code behaves over a short period of time, or
with a particularly constrained set of inputs.</p>

<p>What if the engine optimizes a certain way because of the fixed input,
but in your real program you give more varied input and the optimization
decisions shake out differently (or not at all!)? Or what if the engine
kicks in optimizations because it sees the code being run tens of
thousands of times by the benchmarking utility, but in your real program
it will only run a hundred times in near proximity, and under those
conditions the engine determines the optimizations are not worth it?</p>

<p>And all those optimizations we just hypothesized about might happen in
our constrained test but maybe the engine wouldn’t do them in a more
complex program (for various reasons). Or it could be reversed—the
engine might not optimize such trivial code but may be more inclined to
optimize it more aggressively when the system is already more taxed by a
more sophisticated program.</p>

<p>The point I’m trying to make is that you really don’t know for sure
exactly what’s going on under the covers. All the guesses and hypothesis
you can muster don’t amount to anything concrete for making such decisions.</p>

<p>Does that mean you can’t really do any useful testing? Definitely not!</p>

<p>What this boils down to is that testing <em>not real</em> code gives you <em>not
real</em> results. If possible and practical, you should test
actual real, nontrivial snippets of your code, and under as best of
real conditions as you can actually hope to. Only then will the results
you get have a chance to approximate reality.</p>

<p>Microbenchmarks like <code>++x</code> vs <code>x++</code> are so incredibly likely to be
bogus, we might as well just flatly assume them as such.</p>
</div></section>





</div></section>













































































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
