<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Writing Good Tests</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 6. Benchmarking &amp; Tuning">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-6-benchmarking-tuning">


























































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Writing Good Tests"><div class="epub__sect1" id="writing-good-tests">
<h1>Writing Good Tests</h1>

<p>Let me see if I can articulate the bigger point I’m trying to make here.</p>

<p>Good test authoring requires careful analytical thinking about what
differences exist between two test cases and whether the differences
between them are <em>intentional</em> or <em>unintentional</em>.</p>

<p>Intentional differences are of course normal and OK, but it’s too easy
to create unintentional differences that skew your results. You have to
be really, really careful to avoid that skew. Moreover, you may intend a
difference but it may not be obvious to other readers of your test what
your intent was, so they may doubt (or trust!) your test incorrectly.
How do you fix that?</p>

<p><em>Write better, clearer tests.</em> But also, take the time to document
(using the jsPerf.com “Description” field and/or code comments) exactly
what the intent of your test is, even to the nuanced detail. Call out
the intentional differences, which will help others and your future self
to better identify unintentional differences that could be skewing the
test results.</p>

<p>Isolate things which aren’t relevant to your test by pre-declaring them
in the page or test setup settings so they’re outside the timed parts of
the test.</p>

<p>Instead of trying to narrow in on a tiny snippet of your real code and
benchmarking just that piece out of context, tests and benchmarks are
better when they include a larger (while still relevant) context. Those
tests also tend to run slower, which means any differences you spot are
more relevant in context.</p>
</div></section>

















































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
