<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Big Picture</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 6. Benchmarking &amp; Tuning">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-6-benchmarking-tuning">








































































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Microperformance"><div class="epub__sect1" id="microperformance">












































































<section data-type="sect2" data-pdf-bookmark="Big Picture"><div class="epub__sect2" id="big-picture">
<h2>Big Picture</h2>

<p>Instead of worrying about all these microperformance nuances, we should
instead be looking at big-picture types of optimizations.</p>

<p>How do you know what’s big picture or not? You have to first understand
if your code is running on a critical path. If it’s not on a
critical path, chances are your optimizations are not worth much.</p>

<p>Ever heard the admonition, “that’s premature optimization!”? It comes
from a famous quote from Donald Knuth: “premature optimization is the
root of all evil.” Many developers cite this quote to suggest that most
optimizations are “premature” and are thus a waste of effort. The truth
is, as usual, more nuanced.</p>

<p class="epub__pagebreak-before">Here is Knuth’s quote, in context (emphasis added):</p>
<blockquote>
  <p>Programmers waste enormous amounts of time thinking about, or worrying about, the speed of <em>noncritical</em> parts of their programs, and these attempts at efficiency actually have a strong negative impact when debugging and maintenance are considered. We should forget about small efficiencies, say about 97% of the time: premature optimization is the root of all evil. Yet we should not pass up our opportunities in that <em>critical</em> 3%.</p>
  <p data-type="attribution"><em>Computing Surveys</em> 6 (December 1974)</p>
</blockquote>

<p>I believe it’s a fair paraphrasing to say that Knuth <em>meant</em>:
“non-critical path optimization is the root of all evil.” So the key is
to figure out if your code is on a critical path—if it is, you should
optimize it!</p>

<p>I’d even go so far as to say this: no amount of time spent optimizing
critical paths is wasted, no matter how little is saved; but no amount
of optimization on noncritical paths is justified, no matter how much is
saved.</p>

<p>If your code is on a critical path, such as a “hot” piece of code
that’s going to be run over and over again, or in UX critical places
where users will notice, like an animation loop or CSS style updates,
then you should spare no effort in trying to employ relevant, measurably
significant optimizations.</p>

<p>For example, consider a critical path animation loop that needs to
coerce a string value to a number. There are of course multiple ways to
do that (see the <em>Types &amp; Grammar</em> title of this series), but which
one, if any, is the fastest?</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">x</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__s2">"42"</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>   <code class="epub__c1">// need number `42`</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// Option 1: let implicit coercion automatically happen</code>
<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">y</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">x</code> <code class="epub__o">/</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// Option 2: use `parseInt(..)`</code>
<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">y</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nb">parseInt</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">x</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__mi">0</code> <code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__o">/</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// Option 3: use `Number(..)`</code>
<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">y</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nb">Number</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">x</code> <code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__o">/</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// Option 4: use `+` unary operator</code>
<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">y</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__o">+</code><code class="epub__nx">x</code> <code class="epub__o">/</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// Option 5: use `|` unary operator</code>
<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">y</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">x</code> <code class="epub__o">|</code> <code class="epub__mi">0</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__o">/</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">;</code></pre>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>I will leave it as an exercise to the reader to set up a test if
you’re interested in examining the minute differences in performance
among these options.</p>
</div>

<p>When considering these different options, as they say, “One of these
things is not like the others.” <code>parseInt(..)</code> does the job, but it also
does a lot more—it parses the string rather than just coercing. You
can probably guess, correctly, that <code>parseInt(..)</code> is a slower option,
and you should probably avoid it.</p>

<p>Of course, if <code>x</code> can ever be a value that <em>needs parsing</em>, such as
<code>"42px"</code> (like from a CSS style lookup), then <code>parseInt(..)</code> really is
the only suitable option!</p>

<p><code>Number(..)</code> is also a function call. From a behavioral perspective,
it’s identical to the <code>+</code> unary operator option, but it may in fact be a
little slower, requiring more machinery to execute the function. Of
course, it’s also possible that the JS engine recognizes this behavioral
symmetry and just handles the inlining of <code>Number(..)</code>’s behavior (aka
<code>+x</code>) for you!</p>

<p>But remember, obsessing about <code>+x</code> versus <code>x | 0</code> is in most cases a waste of effort. This is a microperformance issue, and one that
you shouldn’t let dictate/degrade the readability of your program.</p>

<p>While performance is very important in critical paths of your program,
it’s not the only factor. Among several options that are roughly similar
in performance, readability should be another important concern.</p>
</div></section>





</div></section>



































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
