<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Not All Engines Are Alike</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 6. Benchmarking &amp; Tuning">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-6-benchmarking-tuning">








































































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Microperformance"><div class="epub__sect1" id="microperformance">






























































<section data-type="sect2" data-pdf-bookmark="Not All Engines Are Alike"><div class="epub__sect2" id="not-all-engines-are-alike">
<h2>Not All Engines Are Alike</h2>

<p>The different JS engines in various browsers can all be “spec compliant”
while having radically different ways of handling code. The JS
specification doesn’t require anything performance related—well,
except for ES6’s “tail call optimization,” covered in “Tail Call Optimization (TCO)”.</p>

<p>The engines are free to decide that one operation will receive its
attention to optimize, perhaps trading off for lesser performance on
another operation. It can be very tenuous to find an approach for an
operation that always runs faster in all browsers.</p>

<p>There’s a movement among some in the JS dev community, especially those
who work with Node.js, to analyze the specific internal implementation
details of the v8 JavaScript engine and make decisions about writing JS
code that is tailored to take best advantage of how v8 works. You can
actually achieve a surprisingly high degree of performance optimization
with such endeavors, so the payoff for the effort can be quite high.</p>

<p>Some commonly cited examples for v8 are as follows:</p>

<ul>
<li>
<p>Don’t pass the <code>arguments</code> variable from one function to any other
function, as such leakage slows down the function implementation.</p>
</li>
<li>
<p>Isolate a <code>try..catch</code> in its own function. Browsers struggle with
optimizing any function with a <code>try..catch</code> in it, so moving that
construct to its own function means you contain the de-optimization harm
while letting the surrounding code be optimizable.</p>
</li>
</ul>

<p>But rather than focus on those tips specifically, let’s sanity check the
v8-only optimization approach in a general sense.</p>

<p>Are you genuinely writing code that needs to run in only one JS engine?
Even if your code is entirely intended for Node.js <em>right now</em>, is the
assumption that v8 will <em>always</em> be the used JS engine reliable? Is it
possible that someday, a few years from now, there will be another server-side
JS platform besides Node.js that you choose to run your code on? What if
what you optimized for before is now a much slower way of doing that
operation on the new engine?</p>

<p>Or what if your code always stays running on v8 from here on out, but v8
decides at some point to change the way some set of operations works
such that what used to be fast is now slow, and vice versa?</p>

<p>These scenarios aren’t just theoretical, either. It used to be that it
was faster to put multiple string values into an array and then call
<code>join("")</code> on the array to concatenate the values than to just use <code>+</code>
concatenation directly with the values. The historical reason for this
is nuanced, but it has to do with internal implementation details about
how string values were stored and managed in memory.</p>

<p>As a result, best practice advice at the time disseminated across the
industry suggesting developers always use the array <code>join(..)</code> approach.
And many followed.</p>

<p>Except, somewhere along the way, the JS engines changed approaches for
internally managing strings, and specifically put in optimizations for
<code>+</code> concatenation. They didn’t slow down <code>join(..)</code> per se, but they put
more effort into helping <code>+</code> usage, as it was still quite a bit more
widespread.</p>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>The practice of standardizing or optimizing some particular
approach based mostly on its existing widespread usage is often called
(metaphorically) “paving the cowpath.”</p>
</div>

<p>Once that new approach to handling strings and concatenation took hold,
unfortunately all the code out in the wild that was using array
<code>join(..)</code> to concatenate strings was then suboptimal.</p>

<p>Another example: at one time, the Opera browser differed from other
browsers in how it handled the boxing/unboxing of primitive wrapper
objects (see the <em>Types &amp; Grammar</em> title of this series). As such,
their advice to developers was to use a <code>String</code> object instead of the
primitive <code>string</code> value if properties like <code>length</code> or methods like
<code>charAt(..)</code> needed to be accessed. This advice may have been correct
for Opera at the time, but it was literally completely opposite for
other major contemporary browsers, as they had optimizations
specifically for the <code>string</code> primitives and not their object wrapper
counterparts.</p>

<p>I think these various gotchas are at least possible, if not likely, for
code even today. So I’m very cautious about making wide-ranging
performance optimizations in my JS code based purely on engine
implementation details, <em>especially if those details are only true of a
single engine</em>.</p>

<p>The reverse is also something to be wary of: you shouldn’t necessarily
change a piece of code to work around one engine’s difficulty with
running a piece of code in an acceptably performant way.</p>

<p>Historically, IE has been the brunt of many such frustrations, given
that there have been plenty of scenarios in older IE versions where it
struggled with some performance aspect that other major browsers of the
time seemed not to have much trouble with. The string concatenation
discussion we just had was actually a real concern back in the IE6 and
IE7 days, when it was possible to get better performance out of
<code>join(..)</code> than <code>+</code>.</p>

<p>But it’s troublesome to suggest that just one browser’s trouble with
performance is justification for using a code approach that quite
possibly could be suboptimal in all other browsers. Even if the
browser in question has a large market share for your site’s audience,
it may be more practical to write the proper code and rely on the
browser to update itself with better optimizations eventually.</p>

<p>“There is nothing more permanent than a temporary hack.” Chances are,
the code you write now to work around some performance bug will probably
outlive the performance bug in the browser itself.</p>

<p>In the days when a browser only updated once every five years, that was
a tougher call to make. But as it stands now, browsers across the board
are updated at a much more rapid interval (though obviously the mobile
world still lags), and they’re all competing to optimize web features
better and better.</p>

<p>If you run across a case where a browser <em>does</em> have a performance wart
that others don’t suffer from, make sure to report the issue to its developers through
whatever means you have available. Most browsers have open public bug
trackers suitable for this purpose.</p>
<div data-type="tip"><h6>Tip</h6>
<p>I’d suggest working around a performance issue in a browser
only if it is a really drastic show-stopper, not just an annoyance or
frustration. And I’d be very careful to check that the performance hack
didn’t have noticeable negative side effects in another browser.</p>
</div>
</div></section>



















</div></section>



































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
