<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Tail Call Optimization (TCO)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 6. Benchmarking &amp; Tuning">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-6-benchmarking-tuning">






















































































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Tail Call Optimization (TCO)"><div class="epub__sect1" id="tail-call-optimization-tco">
<h1>Tail Call Optimization (TCO)</h1>

<p>As we briefly mentioned earlier, ES6 includes a specific requirement
that ventures into the world of performance. It’s related to a specific
form of optimization that can occur with function calls: <em>tail call
optimization</em>.</p>

<p>Briefly, a tail call is a function call that appears at the “tail” of
another function, such that after the call finishes, there’s nothing
left to do (except perhaps return its result value).</p>

<p>For example, here’s a nonrecursive setup with tail calls:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">x</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__k">return</code> <code class="epub__nx">x</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">bar</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">y</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__k">return</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">y</code> <code class="epub__o">+</code> <code class="epub__mi">1</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>    <code class="epub__c1">// tail call</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">baz</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__k">return</code> <code class="epub__mi">1</code> <code class="epub__o">+</code> <code class="epub__nx">bar</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">40</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>   <code class="epub__c1">// not tail call</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__nx">baz</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>                      <code class="epub__c1">// 42</code></pre>

<p><code>foo(y+1)</code> is a tail call in <code>bar(..)</code> because after <code>foo(..)</code> finishes,
<code>bar(..)</code> is also finished and just needs to return the result of
the <code>foo(..)</code> call. However, <code>bar(40)</code> is <em>not</em> a tail call because
after it completes, its result value must be added to <code>1</code> before <code>baz()</code>
can return it.</p>

<p>Without getting into too much nitty-gritty detail, calling a new
function requires an extra amount of reserved memory to manage the call
stack, called a <em>stack frame</em>. So the preceding snippet would generally
require a stack frame for each of <code>baz()</code>, <code>bar(..)</code>, and <code>foo(..)</code> all
at the same time.</p>

<p>However, if a TCO-capable engine can realize that the <code>foo(y+1)</code> call is
in <em>tail position</em> meaning <code>bar(..)</code> is basically complete, then when
calling <code>foo(..)</code>, it doesn’t need to create a new stack frame, but can
instead reuse the existing stack frame from <code>bar(..)</code>. That’s not only
faster, but it also uses less memory.</p>

<p>That sort of optimization isn’t a big deal in a simple snippet, but it
becomes a much bigger deal when dealing with recursion, especially if
the recursion could have resulted in hundreds or thousands of stack
frames. With TCO, the engine can perform all those calls with a single
stack frame!</p>

<p>Recursion is a hairy topic in JS because without TCO, engines have had
to implement arbitrary (and different!) limits to how deep they will let
the recursion stack get before they stop it, to prevent running out of
memory. With TCO, recursive functions with <em>tail position</em> calls can
essentially run unbounded, because there’s never any extra usage of
memory!</p>

<p>Consider that recursive <code>factorial(..)</code> from before, but rewritten to
make it TCO-friendly:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">factorial</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">n</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">fact</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">n</code><code class="epub__p">,</code><code class="epub__nx">res</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
        <code class="epub__k">if</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">n</code> <code class="epub__o">&lt;</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__k">return</code> <code class="epub__nx">res</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>

        <code class="epub__k">return</code> <code class="epub__nx">fact</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">n</code> <code class="epub__o">-</code> <code class="epub__mi">1</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__nx">n</code> <code class="epub__o">*</code> <code class="epub__nx">res</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code>

    <code class="epub__k">return</code> <code class="epub__nx">fact</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">n</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__mi">1</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__nx">factorial</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">5</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>     <code class="epub__c1">// 120</code></pre>

<p>This version of <code>factorial(..)</code> is still recursive, but it’s also
optimizable with TCO, because both inner <code>fact(..)</code> calls are in tail
position.</p>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>It’s important to note that TCO applies only if there’s actually
a tail call. If you write recursive functions without tail calls, the
performance will still fall back to normal stack frame allocation, and
the engines’ limits on such recursive call stacks will still apply. Many
recursive functions can be rewritten as we just showed with
<code>factorial(..)</code>, but it takes careful attention to detail.</p>
</div>

<p>One reason that ES6 requires engines to implement TCO rather than
leaving it up to their discretion is because the <em>lack of TCO</em> actually
tends to reduce the chances that certain algorithms will be implemented
in JS using recursion, for fear of the call stack limits.</p>

<p>If the lack of TCO in the engine would just gracefully degrade to slower
performance in all cases, it wouldn’t have been something that
ES6 needed to <em>require</em>. But because the lack of TCO can actually make
certain programs impractical, it’s more an important feature of the
language than just a hidden implementation detail.</p>

<p>ES6 guarantees that from now on, JS developers will be able to rely on
this optimization across all ES6+ compliant browsers. That’s a win for
JS performance!</p>
</div></section>





















</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
