<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Review</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="chapter" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" data-pdf-bookmark="Chapter 6. Benchmarking &amp; Tuning">
  <div class="epub__chapter" id="chapter-6-benchmarking-tuning">




































































































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Review"><div class="epub__sect1" id="review_ch06">
<h1>Review</h1>

<p>Effectively benchmarking performance of a piece of code, especially to
compare it to another option for that same code to see which approach is
faster, requires careful attention to detail.</p>

<p>Rather than rolling your own statistically valid benchmarking logic,
just use the Benchmark.js library, which does that for you. But be
careful about how you author tests, because it’s far too easy to
construct a test that seems valid but that’s actually flawed—even
tiny differences can skew the results to be completely unreliable.</p>

<p>It’s important to get as many test results from as many different
environments as possible to eliminate hardware/device bias. jsPerf.com
is a fantastic website for crowdsourcing performance benchmark test
runs.</p>

<p>Many common performance tests unfortunately obsess about irrelevant
microperformance details like <code>x++</code> versus <code>++x</code>. Writing good tests
means understanding how to focus on big picture concerns, like
optimizing on a critical path, and avoiding falling into traps like
different JS engines’ implementation details.</p>

<p>Tail call optimization (TCO) is a required optimization as of ES6 that
will make some recursive patterns practical in JS where they would have
been impossible otherwise. TCO allows a function call in the tail
position of another function to execute without needing any extra
resources, which means the engine no longer needs to place arbitrary
restrictions on call stack depth for recursive algorithms.</p>
</div></section>







</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
