<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Appendix A. asynquence Library</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="appendix" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="appendix" data-pdf-bookmark="Appendix A. asynquence Library">
  <div class="epub__appendix" id="appendix-a-asynquence-library">
<h1><span class="epub__label">Appendix A. </span>asynquence Library</h1>


<p>Chapters 1 and 2 went into quite a bit of detail about typical
asynchronous programming patterns and how they’re commonly solved with
callbacks. But we also saw why callbacks are fatally limited in
capability, which led us to Chapters 3 and 4, with Promises and
generators offering a much more solid, trustable, and reason-able base
to build your asynchrony on.</p>

<p>I referenced my own asynchronous library <em>asynquence</em>—“async” + “sequence” =
“asynquence”—several times in this book, and I want to now briefly
explain how it works and why its unique design is important and helpful.</p>

<p>In Appendix B, we’ll explore some advanced async patterns, but
you’ll probably want a library to make those palatable enough to be
useful. We’ll use <em>asynquence</em> to express those patterns, so you’ll want
to spend a little time here getting to know the library first.</p>

<p><em>asynquence</em> is obviously not the only option for good async coding;
certainly there are many great libraries in this space. But <em>asynquence</em>
provides a unique perspective by combining the best of all these
patterns into a single library, and moreover is built on a single basic
abstraction: the (async) sequence.</p>

<p>My premise is that sophisticated JS programs often need bits and pieces
of various different asynchronous patterns woven together, and this is
usually left entirely up to each developer to figure out. Instead of
having to bring in two or more different async libraries that focus on
different aspects of asynchrony, <em>asynquence</em> unifies them into variated
sequence steps, with just one core library to learn and deploy.</p>

<p>I believe the value is strong enough with <em>asynquence</em> to make async
flow control programming with Promise-style semantics super easy to
accomplish, so that’s why we’ll exclusively focus on that library here.</p>

<p>To begin, I’ll explain the design principles behind <em>asynquence</em>, and
then we’ll illustrate how its API works with code examples.</p>


































































































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
