<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Sequences and Abstraction Design</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="appendix" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="appendix" data-pdf-bookmark="Appendix A. asynquence Library">
  <div class="epub__appendix" id="appendix-a-asynquence-library">






















<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Sequences and Abstraction Design"><div class="epub__sect1" id="sequences-abstraction-design">
<h1>Sequences and Abstraction Design</h1>

<p>Understanding <em>asynquence</em> begins with understanding a fundamental
abstraction: any series of steps for a task, whether they separately are
synchronous or asynchronous, can be collectively thought of as a
<em>sequence</em>. In other words, a sequence is a container that represents a
task, and is comprised of individual (potentially async) steps to
complete that task.</p>

<p>Each step in the sequence is controlled under the covers by a Promise
(see Chapter 3). That is, every step you add to a sequence implicitly
creates a Promise that is wired to the previous end of the sequence.
Because of the semantics of Promises, every single step advancement in a
sequence is asynchronous, even if you synchronously complete the step.</p>

<p>Moreover, a sequence will always proceed linearly from step to step,
meaning that step 2 always comes after step 1 finishes, and so on.</p>

<p>Of course, a new sequence can be forked off an existing sequence,
meaning the fork only occurs once the main sequence reaches that point
in the flow. Sequences can also be combined in various ways, including
having one sequence subsumed by another sequence at a particular point
in the flow.</p>

<p>A sequence is kind of like a Promise chain. However, with Promise
chains, there is no “handle” to grab that references the entire chain.
Whichever Promise you have a reference to only represents the current
step in the chain plus any other steps hanging off it. Essentially, you
cannot hold a reference to a Promise chain unless you hold a reference
to the first Promise in the chain.</p>

<p>There are many cases where it turns out to be quite useful to have a
handle that references the entire sequence collectively. The most
important of those cases is with sequence abort/cancel. As we covered
extensively in Chapter 3, Promises themselves should never be able to be
canceled, as this violates a fundamental design imperative: external
immutability.</p>

<p>But sequences have no such immutability design principle, mostly because
sequences are not passed around as future-value containers that need
immutable value semantics. So sequences are the proper level of
abstraction to handle abort/cancel behavior. <em>asynquence</em> sequences can
be <code>abort()</code>ed at any time, and the sequence will stop at that point and
not go for any reason.</p>

<p>There’s plenty more reasons to prefer a sequence abstraction on top of
Promise chains for flow control purposes.</p>

<p>First, Promise chaining is a rather manual process—one that can get
pretty tedious once you start creating and chaining Promises across a
wide swath of your programs—and this tedium can act
counterproductively to dissuade the developer from using Promises in
places where they are quite appropriate.</p>

<p>Abstractions are meant to reduce boilerplate and tedium, so the sequence
abstraction is a good solution to this problem. With Promises, your
focus is on the individual step, and there’s little assumption that you
will keep the chain going. With sequences, the opposite approach is
taken, assuming the sequence will keep having more steps added
indefinitely.</p>

<p>This abstraction complexity reduction is especially powerful when you
start thinking about higher-order Promise patterns (beyond <code>race([..])</code>
and <code>all([..])</code>.</p>

<p>For example, in the middle of a sequence, you may want to express a step
that is conceptually like a <code>try..catch</code> in that the step will always
result in success, either the intended main success resolution or a
positive nonerror signal for the caught error. Or, you might want to
express a step that is like a retry/until loop, where it keeps trying
the same step over and over until success occurs.</p>

<p>These sorts of abstractions are quite nontrivial to express using only
Promise primitives, and doing so in the middle of an existing Promise
chain is not pretty. But if you abstract your thinking to a sequence,
and consider a step as a wrapper around a Promise, that step wrapper can
hide such details, freeing you to think about the flow control in the
most sensible way without being bothered by the details.</p>

<p>Second, and perhaps more importantly, thinking of async flow control in
terms of steps in a sequence allows you to abstract out the details of
what types of asynchronicity are involved with each individual step.
Under the covers, a Promise will always control the step, but above the
covers, that step can look either like a continuation callback (the
simple default), or like a real Promise, or as a run-to-completion
generator, or… Hopefully, you get the picture.</p>

<p>Third, sequences can more easily be twisted to adapt to different modes
of thinking, such as event-, stream-, or reactive-based coding.
<em>asynquence</em> provides a pattern I call <em>reactive sequences</em> (which we’ll
cover later) as a variation on the <em>reactive observable</em> ideas in RxJS
(Reactive Extensions), which lets a repeatable event fire off a new
sequence instance each time. Promises are one-shot-only, so it’s quite
awkward to express repetitious asynchrony with Promises alone.</p>

<p>Another alternate mode of thinking inverts the resolution/control
capability in a pattern I call <em>iterable sequences</em>. Instead of each
individual step internally controlling its own completion (and thus
advancement of the sequence), the sequence is inverted so the
advancement control is through an external iterator, and each step in
the iterable sequence just responds to the <code>next(..)</code> iterator
control.</p>

<p>We’ll explore all of these different variations as we go throughout the
rest of this appendix, so don’t worry if we ran over those bits far too
quickly just now.</p>

<p>The takeaway is that sequences are a more powerful and sensible
abstraction for complex asynchrony than just Promises (Promise chains)
or just generators, and <em>asynquence</em> is designed to express that
abstraction with just the right level of sugar to make async programming
more understandable and more enjoyable.</p>
</div></section>



























































































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
