<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Errors</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="appendix" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="appendix" data-pdf-bookmark="Appendix A. asynquence Library">
  <div class="epub__appendix" id="appendix-a-asynquence-library">




































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="asynquence API"><div class="epub__sect1" id="asynquence-api">




























<section data-type="sect2" data-pdf-bookmark="Errors"><div class="epub__sect2" id="errors">
<h2>Errors</h2>

<p>One important difference with <em>asynquence</em> compared to Promises is with
error handling.</p>

<p>With Promises, each individual Promise (step) in a chain can have its
own independent error, and each subsequent step has the ability to
handle the error (or not). The main reason for this semantic comes (again)
from the focus on individual Promises rather than on the chain
(sequence) as a whole.</p>

<p>I believe that most of the time, an error in one part of a sequence is
generally not recoverable, so the subsequent steps in the sequence are
moot and should be skipped. So, by default, an error at any step of a
sequence throws the entire sequence into error mode, and the rest of the
normal steps are ignored.</p>

<p>If you <em>do</em> need to have a step where its error is recoverable, there
are several different API methods that can accommodate, such as <code>try(..)</code> (previously mentioned as a kind of <code>try..catch</code> step) or <code>until(..)</code> (a retry loop that keeps attempting the step until it succeeds or you
manually <code>break()</code> the loop). <em>asynquence</em> even has <code>pThen(..)</code> and
<code>pCatch(..)</code> methods, which work identically to how normal Promise
<code>then(..)</code> and <code>catch(..)</code> work (see Chapter 3), so you can do localized
mid-sequence error handling if you so choose.</p>

<p>The point is, you have both options, but the more common one in my
experience is the default. With Promises, to get a chain of steps to
ignore all steps once an error occurs, you have to take care not to
register a rejection handler at any step; otherwise, that error gets
swallowed as handled, and the sequence may continue (perhaps
unexpectedly). This kind of desired behavior is a bit awkward to
properly and reliably handle.</p>

<p>To register a sequence error notification handler, <em>asynquence</em> provides
an <code>or(..)</code> sequence method, which also has an alias of <span class="epub__keep-together"><code>onerror(..)</code></span>.
You can call this method anywhere in the sequence, and you can register
as many handlers as you’d like. That makes it easy for multiple
different consumers to listen in on a sequence to know if it failed or
not; it’s kind of like an error event handler in that respect.</p>

<p>Just like with Promises, all JS exceptions become sequence errors, or
you can programmatically signal a sequence error:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">sq</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">ASQ</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">done</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">setTimeout</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(){</code>
        <code class="epub__c1">// signal an error for the sequence</code>
        <code class="epub__nx">done</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">fail</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"Oops"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
    <code class="epub__p">},</code> <code class="epub__mi">100</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">)</code>
<code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">then</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">done</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// will never get here</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">)</code>
<code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">or</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">err</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">err</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>         <code class="epub__c1">// Oops</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">)</code>
<code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">then</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">done</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// won't get here either</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// later</code>

<code class="epub__nx">sq</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">or</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">err</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">err</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>         <code class="epub__c1">// Oops</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>

<p>Another really important difference with error handling in <em>asynquence</em>
compared to native Promises is the default behavior of unhandled
exceptions. As we discussed at length in Chapter 3, a rejected Promise
without a registered rejection handler will just silently hold (aka
swallow) the error; you have to remember to always end a chain with a
final <code>catch(..)</code>.</p>

<p>In <em>asynquence</em>, the assumption is reversed.</p>

<p>If an error occurs on a sequence, and it <em>at that moment</em> has no error
handlers registered, the error is reported to the <code>console</code>. In other
words, unhandled rejections are by default always reported so as not to
be swallowed and missed.</p>

<p>As soon as you register an error handler against a sequence, it opts
that sequence out of such reporting, to prevent duplicate noise.</p>

<p>There may, in fact, be cases where you want to create a sequence that
may go into the error state before you have a chance to register the
handler. This isn’t common, but it can happen from time to time.</p>

<p>In those cases, you can also <em>opt a sequence instance out</em> of error
reporting by calling <code>defer()</code> on the sequence. You should only opt out
of error reporting if you are sure that you’re going to eventually
handle such errors:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">sq1</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">ASQ</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">done</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">doesnt</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">Exist</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>         <code class="epub__c1">// will throw exception to console</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">sq2</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">ASQ</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">done</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">doesnt</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">Exist</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>         <code class="epub__c1">// will throw only a sequence error</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">)</code>
<code class="epub__c1">// opt-out of error reporting</code>
<code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">defer</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>

<code class="epub__nx">setTimeout</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(){</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">sq1</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">or</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">err</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
        <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">err</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// ReferenceError</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

    <code class="epub__nx">sq2</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">or</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">err</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
        <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">err</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// ReferenceError</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">},</code> <code class="epub__mi">100</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// ReferenceError (from sq1)</code></pre>

<p>This is better error handling behavior than Promises themselves have,
because it’s the pit of success, not the pit of failure (see Chapter 3).</p>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>If a sequence is piped into (aka subsumed by) another sequence—see “Combining Sequences” for a complete description—then the
source sequence is opted out of error reporting, but now the target
sequence’s error reporting or lack thereof must be considered.</p>
</div>
</div></section>















































</div></section>













































































</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
