<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Message Passing</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <section data-type="appendix" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="appendix" data-pdf-bookmark="Appendix B. Advanced Async Patterns">
  <div class="epub__appendix" id="appendix-b-advanced-async-patterns">






















































<section data-type="sect1" data-pdf-bookmark="Communicating Sequential Processes (CSP)"><div class="epub__sect1" id="communicating-sequential-processes-csp">

















<section data-type="sect2" data-pdf-bookmark="Message Passing"><div class="epub__sect2" id="message-passing">
<h2>Message Passing</h2>

<p>The core principle in CSP is that all communication/interaction between
otherwise independent processes must be through formal message passing.
Perhaps counter to your expectations, CSP message passing is described
as a synchronous action, where the sender process and the receiver
process have to mutually be ready for the message to be passed.</p>

<p>How could such synchronous messaging possibly be related to asynchronous
programming in JavaScript?</p>

<p>The concreteness of relationship comes from the nature of how ES6
generators are used to produce synchronous-looking actions that under
the covers can indeed either be synchronous or (more likely)
asynchronous.</p>

<p>In other words, two or more concurrently running generators can appear
to synchronously message each other while preserving the fundamental
asynchrony of the system because each generator’s code is paused (blocked), waiting on resumption of an asynchronous action.</p>

<p>How does this work?</p>

<p>Imagine a generator (“process”) called “A” that wants to send a
message to generator “B.” First, “A” <code>yield</code>s the message (thus pausing
“A”) to be sent to “B.” When “B” is ready and takes the message, “A” is
then resumed (unblocked).</p>

<p>Symmetrically, imagine a generator “A” that wants a message <em>from</em> “B.”
“A” <code>yield</code>s its request (thus pausing “A”) for the message from “B,”
and once “B” sends a message, “A” takes the message and is resumed.</p>

<p>One of the more popular expressions of this CSP message passing theory
comes from ClojureScript’s <em>core.async</em> library, and also from the <em>go</em>
language. These takes on CSP embody the described communication
semantics in a conduit that is opened between processes called a
<em>channel</em>.</p>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>The term <em>channel</em> is used in part because there are modes in
which more than one value can be sent at once into the buffer of the
channel; this is similar to what you may think of as a stream. We won’t
go into depth about it here, but it can be a very powerful technique for
managing streams of data.</p>
</div>

<p>In the simplest notion of CSP, a channel that we create between “A” and
“B” would have a method called <code>take(..)</code> for blocking to receive a
value, and a method called <code>put(..)</code> for blocking to send a value.</p>

<p>This might look like:</p>

<pre data-type="programlisting" data-code-language="js"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">ch</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">channel</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>

<code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__o">*</code><code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">msg</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__k">yield</code> <code class="epub__nx">take</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">ch</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">msg</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__o">*</code><code class="epub__nx">bar</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__k">yield</code> <code class="epub__nx">put</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">ch</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__s2">"Hello World"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"message sent"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__nx">run</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__nx">run</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">bar</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__c1">// Hello World</code>
<code class="epub__c1">// "message sent"</code></pre>

<p>Compare this structured, synchronous(-looking) message passing
interaction to the informal and unstructured message sharing that
<code>ASQ#runner(..)</code> provides through the <code>token.messages</code> array and
cooperative <code>yield</code>ing. In essence, <code>yield put(..)</code> is a single
operation that both sends the value and pauses execution to transfer
control, whereas in earlier examples we did those as separate steps.</p>

<p>Moreover, CSP stresses that you don’t really explicitly transfer
control, but rather design your concurrent routines to block
expecting either a value received from the channel, or to block
expecting to try to send a message on the channel. The blocking around
receiving or sending messages is how you coordinate sequencing of
behavior between the coroutines.</p>
<div data-type="note" epub:type="note"><h6>Note</h6>
<p>Fair warning: this pattern is very powerful but it’s also a
little mind twisting to get used to at first. You will want to practice
this a bit to get used to this new way of thinking about coordinating
your concurrency.</p>
</div>

<p>There are several great libraries that have implemented this flavor of
CSP in JavaScript, most notably js-csp, which James Long forked and has written extensively about.
Also, it cannot be stressed enough how amazing the many writings of
David Nolen are on the topic of
adapting ClojureScript’s go-style core.async CSP into JS generators.</p>
</div></section>



















</div></section>





















</div>
</section>


</body>
</html>
