<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Appendix C. Exercise answers
      </title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="epub__calibre sbo-stylesheetcss sbo-pagestylescss">
<h2>Appendix C. <a id="app03__title"/>Exercise answers
      </h2>
      
      
      
      
      <h3><a id="app03lev1sec1__title"/>Chapter 2. Building the page at runtime
      </h3>
      
      <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa3"/></p>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa3qe1"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa3q1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">1 </b></p><p class="epub__noind"><a id="iddle1045"/><a id="iddle1139"/><a id="iddle1444"/><a id="iddle1446"/><a id="iddle1453"/><a id="iddle1987"/>What are the two phases in the lifecycle of a client-side web application?
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa3q1a1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">The two phases in the lifecycle of a client-side web application are page building and event handling. In the page-building
               phase, the user interface of our page is built by processing HTML code and by executing mainline JavaScript code. After the
               last HTML node is processed, the page enters the event-handling phase, in which various events are processed.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa3qe2"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa3q2"/><b class="epub__calibre21">2 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">What is the main advantage of using the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">addEventListener</kbd> method to register an event handler versus assigning a handler to a specific element property?
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa3q2a2"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">When assigning event handlers to specific element properties, we can register only one event handler; <kbd class="epub__calibre15">addEventListener</kbd>, on the other hand, enables us to register as many event handlers as necessary.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa3qe3"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa3q3"/><b class="epub__calibre21">3 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">How many events can be processed at once?</p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa3q3a3"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">JavaScript is based on a single-threaded execution model, in which events are processed one at a time.</p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa3qe4"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa3q4"/><b class="epub__calibre21">4 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">In what order are events from the event queue processed?</p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa3q4a4"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Events are processed in the order in which they were generated: first in, first out.</p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      
      
      
      <h3><a id="app03lev1sec2__title"/>Chapter 3. First-class functions for the novice: definitions and arguments
      </h3>
      
      <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa4"/></p>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa4qe1"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa4q1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">1 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">In the following code snippet, which functions are callback functions?</p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e40118" class="epub__calibre5">//sortAsc is a callback because the JavaScript engine
//calls it to compare array items
numbers.sort(function <b class="epub__calibre21">sortAsc</b>(a,b){
  return a – b;
});

//Not a callback; ninja is called like a standard function
function <b class="epub__calibre21">ninja</b>(){}
ninja();

var myButton = document.getElementById("myButton");
//handleClick is a callback, the function is called
//whenever myButton is clicked
myButton.addEventListener("click", function <b class="epub__calibre21">handleClick</b>(){
  alert("Clicked");
});</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa4qe2"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa4q2"/><b class="epub__calibre21">2 </b></p><p class="epub__noind"><a id="iddle2095"/>In the following snippet, categorize functions according to their type (function declaration, function expression, or arrow
               function).
            </p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e40147" class="epub__calibre5">//function expression as argument to another function
numbers.sort(function <b class="epub__calibre21">sortAsc</b>(a,b){
  return a – b;
});

//arrow function as argument to another function
numbers.sort(<b class="epub__calibre21">(a,b) =&gt; b – a</b>);

//function expression as the callee in a call expression
<b class="epub__calibre21">function(){}</b>)();

//function declaration
<b class="epub__calibre21">function outer(){</b>
  //function declaration
  <b class="epub__calibre21">function inner(){}</b>
  return inner;
<b class="epub__calibre21">}</b>

//function expression call wrapped in an expression
(<b class="epub__calibre21">function(){}</b>());

//arrow function as a callee
(<b class="epub__calibre21">()=&gt;"Yoshi"</b>)();</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa4qe3"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa4q3"/><b class="epub__calibre21">3 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">After executing the following code snippet, what are the values of variables <kbd class="epub__calibre15">samurai</kbd> and <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninja</kbd>?
            </p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e40190" class="epub__calibre5">//"Tomoe", the value of the expression body of the arrow function
var samurai = (() =&gt; "Tomoe")();
//undefined, in case an arrow function's body is a block statement
//the value is the value of the return statement.
//Because there's no return statement, the value is undefined.
var ninja = (() =&gt; {"Yoshi"})();</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa4qe4"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa4q4"/><b class="epub__calibre21">4 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Within the body of the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">test</kbd> function, what are the values of parameters <kbd class="epub__calibre15">a</kbd>, <kbd class="epub__calibre15">b</kbd>, and <kbd class="epub__calibre15">c</kbd> for the two function calls?
            </p>
            
            
            <pre id="PLd0e40217" class="epub__calibre5">function test(a, b, ...c){ /*a, b, c*/}

// a = 1; b = 2; c = [3, 4, 5]
test(1, 2, 3, 4, 5);
// a = undefined; b = undefined; c = []
test();</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa4qe5"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa4q5"/><b class="epub__calibre21">5 </b></p><p class="epub__noind"><a id="iddle1071"/><a id="iddle1455"/><a id="iddle1571"/><a id="iddle1685"/>After executing the following code snippet, what are the values of the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">message1</kbd> and <kbd class="epub__calibre15">message2</kbd> variables?
            </p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e40271" class="epub__calibre5">function getNinjaWieldingWeapon(ninja, weapon = "katana"){
  return ninja + " " + katana;
}

//"Yoshi katana" – there's only one argument in the call
//so weapon defaults to "katana"
var message1 = getNinjaWieldingWeapon("Yoshi");

//"Yoshi wakizashi" – we've sent in two arguments, the default
//value is not taken into account
var message2 = getNinjaWieldingWeapon("Yoshi", "wakizashi");</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      
      
      
      <h3><a id="app03lev1sec3__title"/>Chapter 4. Functions for the journeyman: understanding function invocation
      </h3>
      
      <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa5"/></p>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa5qe1"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa5q1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">1 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">The following function calculates the sum of the passed-in arguments using the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">arguments</kbd> object. By using the rest parameters introduced in the previous chapter, rewrite the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">sum</kbd> function so that it doesn’t use the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">arguments</kbd> object.
            </p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e40304" class="epub__calibre5">function sum(){
  var sum = 0;
  for(var i = 0; i &lt; arguments.length; i++){
     sum += arguments[i];
  }
  return sum;
}

assert(sum(1, 2, 3) === 6, 'Sum of first three numbers is 6');
assert(sum(1, 2, 3, 4) === 10, 'Sum of first four numbers is 10');</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa5q1a1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Add a rest parameter to the function definition and slightly adjust the function body:</p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e40316" class="epub__calibre5">function sum(<b class="epub__calibre21">... numbers</b>){
  var sum = 0;
  for(var i = 0; i &lt; <b class="epub__calibre21">numbers</b>.length; i++){
     sum += <b class="epub__calibre21">numbers</b>[i];
  }
  return sum;
}

assert(sum(1, 2, 3) === 6, 'Sum of first three numbers is 6');
assert(sum(1, 2, 3, 4) === 10, 'Sum of first four numbers is 10');</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa5qe2"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa5q2"/><b class="epub__calibre21">2 </b></p><p class="epub__noind"><a id="iddle1809"/><a id="iddle2203"/>After running the following code in the browser, what are the values of variables <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninja</kbd> and <kbd class="epub__calibre15">samurai</kbd>?
            </p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e40356" class="epub__calibre5">function getSamurai(samurai){
  "use strict"

  arguments[0] = "Ishida";

  return samurai;
}

function getNinja(ninja){
  arguments[0] = "Fuma";
  return ninja;
}

var samurai = getSamurai("Toyotomi");
var ninja = getNinja("Yoshi");</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa5q2a2"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind"><kbd class="epub__calibre15">samurai</kbd> will have the value <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Toyotomi</kbd>, and <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninja</kbd> will have the value <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Fuma</kbd>. Because the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">getSamurai</kbd> function is in strict mode, the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">arguments</kbd> parameter doesn’t alias function parameters, so changing the value of the first argument won’t change the value of the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">samurai</kbd> parameter. Because the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">getNinja</kbd> function is in nonstrict mode, any changes made to the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">arguments</kbd> parameter will be reflected in the function parameters.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa5qe3"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa5q3"/><b class="epub__calibre21">3 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">When running the following code, which of the assertions will pass?</p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e40402" class="epub__calibre5">function whoAmI1(){
  "use strict";
  return this;
}

function whoAmI2(){
  return this;
}

assert(whoAmI1() === window, "Window?"); <b class="epub__calibre21">//fail</b>
assert(whoAmI2() === window, "Window?"); <b class="epub__calibre21">//pass</b></pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa5q3a3"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">The <kbd class="epub__calibre15">whoAmI1</kbd> function is in strict mode; when it’s called as a function, the value of the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">this</kbd> parameter will be <kbd class="epub__calibre15">undefined</kbd> (and not <kbd class="epub__calibre15">window</kbd>). The second assertion will pass: If a function in nonstrict mode is called as a function, <kbd class="epub__calibre15">this</kbd> refers to the global object (the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">window</kbd> object, when running the code in the browser).
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa5qe4"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa5q4"/><b class="epub__calibre21">4 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">When running the following code, which of the assertions will pass?</p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e40444" class="epub__calibre5">var ninja1 = {
   whoAmI: function(){
     return this;
   }
};

var ninja2 = {
  whoAmI: ninja1.whoAmI
};

var identify = ninja2.whoAmI;

//pass: whoAmI called as a method of ninja1
assert(ninja1.whoAmI() === ninja1, "ninja1?");

//fail: whoAmI called as a method of ninja2
assert(ninja2.whoAmI() === ninja1, " ninja1 again?");

//fail: identify calls the function as a function
//because we are in non-strict mode, this refers to the window
assert(identify() === ninja1, "ninja1 again?");

//pass: Using call to supply the function context
//this refers to ninja2
assert(ninja1.whoAmI.call(ninja2) === ninja2, "ninja2 here?");</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa5qe5"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa5q5"/><b class="epub__calibre21">5 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">When running the following code, which of the assertions will pass?</p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e40459" class="epub__calibre5">function Ninja(){
  this.whoAmI = () =&gt; this;
}

var ninja1 = new Ninja();
var ninja2 = {
  whoAmI: ninja1.whoAmI
};

//pass: whoAmI is an arrow function inherits the function context
//from the context in which it was created.
//Because it was created during the construction of ninja1
//this will always point to ninja1
assert(ninja1.whoAmI() === ninja1, "ninja1 here?");

//false: this always refers to ninja1
assert(ninja2.whoAmI() === ninja2, "ninja2 here?");</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa5qe6"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa5q6"/><b class="epub__calibre21">6 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Which of the following assertions will pass?</p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e40472" class="epub__calibre5">function Ninja(){
  this.whoAmI = function(){
    return this;
  }.bind(this);
}

var ninja1 = new Ninja();
var ninja2 = {
  whoAmI: ninja1.whoAmI
};
//pass: the function assigned to whoAmI is a function bound
//to ninja1 (the value of this when the constructor was invoked)
//this will always refer to ninja1
assert(ninja1.whoAmI() === ninja1, "ninja1 here?");
//fail: this in whoAmI always refers to ninja1
//because whoAmI is a bound function.
assert(ninja2.whoAmI() === ninja2, "ninja2 here?");</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      
      
      
      <h3><a id="app03lev1sec4__title"/>Chapter 5. Functions for the master: closures and scopes
      </h3>
      
      <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa6"/></p>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa6qe1"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa6q1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">1 </b></p><p class="epub__noind"><a id="iddle1198"/><a id="iddle1452"/><a id="iddle1549"/><a id="iddle1580"/><a id="iddle1990"/>Closures allow functions to
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa6q1a1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Access external variables that are in scope when the function is defined (option a)</p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa6qe2"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa6q2"/><b class="epub__calibre21">2 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Closures come with</p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa6q2a2"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Memory costs (closures keep alive the variables that are in scope when the function is defined) (option b)</p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa6qe3"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa6q3"/><b class="epub__calibre21">3 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">In the following code example, mark the identifiers accessed through closures:</p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e40565" class="epub__calibre5">function Samurai(name) {
  var weapon = "katana";

  this.getWeapon = function(){
    //accesses the local variable: weapon
    return weapon;
  };

  this.getName = function(){
    //accesses the function parameter: name
    return name;
  }

  this.message = name + " wielding a " + weapon;

  this.getMessage = function(){
    //this.message is not accessed through a closure
   //it is an object property (and not a variable)
    return this.message;
  }
}

var samurai = new Samurai("Hattori");

samurai.getWeapon();
samurai.getName();
samurai.getMessage();</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa6qe4"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa6q4"/><b class="epub__calibre21">4 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">In the following code, how many execution contexts are created, and what’s the largest size of the execution context stack?</p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e40579" class="epub__calibre5">function perfom(ninja) {
  sneak(ninja);
  infiltrate(ninja);
}

function sneak(ninja) {
  return ninja + " skulking";
}

function infiltrate(ninja) {
  return ninja + " infiltrating";
}


perfom("Kuma");</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa6q4a3"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind"><a id="iddle1454"/><a id="iddle1559"/><a id="iddle1579"/><a id="iddle1597"/><a id="iddle1722"/><a id="iddle1886"/><a id="iddle1913"/>The largest stack size is 3, in the following situations:
            </p>
            
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
            <ul class="epub__calibre19">
               
               <li class="epub__calibre20">global code -&gt; <kbd class="epub__calibre15">perform</kbd> -&gt; <kbd class="epub__calibre15">sneak</kbd>
                  
               </li>
               
               <li class="epub__calibre20">global code -&gt; <kbd class="epub__calibre15">perform</kbd> -&gt; <kbd class="epub__calibre15">infiltrate</kbd>
                  
               </li>
               
            </ul>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa6qe5"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa6q5"/><b class="epub__calibre21">5 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Which keyword in JavaScript allows us to define variables that can’t be reassigned to a completely new value?</p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa6q5a4"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind"><kbd class="epub__calibre15">const</kbd> variables can’t be reassigned to new values.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa6qe6"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa6q6"/><b class="epub__calibre21">6 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">What’s the difference between <kbd class="epub__calibre15">var</kbd> and <kbd class="epub__calibre15">let</kbd>?
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa6q6a5"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">The keyword <kbd class="epub__calibre15">var</kbd> is used to define only function- or global-scoped variables, whereas <kbd class="epub__calibre15">let</kbd> enables us to define block-scoped, function-scoped, and global-scoped variables.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa6qe7"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa6q7"/><b class="epub__calibre21">7 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Where and why will the following code throw an exception?</p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e40725" class="epub__calibre5">getNinja();
getSamurai();  //throws an exception

function getNinja() {
  return "Yoshi";
}

var getSamurai = () =&gt; "Hattori";</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa6q7a6"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">An exception will be thrown when trying to invoke the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">getSamurai</kbd> function. The <kbd class="epub__calibre15">getNinja</kbd> function is defined with a function declaration and will be created before any of the code is executed; we can call it “before”
               its declaration has been reached in code. The <kbd class="epub__calibre15">getSamurai</kbd> function, on the other hand, is an arrow function that’s created when the execution reaches it, so it will be undefined when
               we try to invoke it.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      
      
      
      <h3><a id="app03lev1sec5__title"/>Chapter 6. Functions for the future: generators and promises
      </h3>
      
      <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa7"/></p>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa7qe1"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa7q1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">1 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">After running the following code, what are the values of variables <kbd class="epub__calibre15">a1</kbd> to <kbd class="epub__calibre15">a4</kbd>?
            </p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e40769" class="epub__calibre5">function *EvenGenerator(){
  let num = 2;
  while(true){
    yield num;
    num = num + 2;
  }
}

let generator = EvenGenerator();

//2 the first value yielded
let a1 = generator.next().value;

//4 the second value yielded
let a2 = generator.next().value;
//2, because we have started a new generator
let a3 = EvenGenerator().next().value;
//6, we go back to the first generator
let a4 = generator.next().value;</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa7qe2"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa7q2"/><b class="epub__calibre21">2 </b></p><p class="epub__noind"><a id="iddle1509"/><a id="iddle2192"/>What’s the content of the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninjas</kbd> array after running the following code? (Hint: Think about how the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">for-of</kbd> loop can be implemented with a <kbd class="epub__calibre15">while</kbd> loop.)
            </p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e40804" class="epub__calibre5">function* NinjaGenerator(){
  yield "Yoshi";
  return "Hattori";
  yield "Hanzo";
}

var ninjas = [];
for(let ninja of NinjaGenerator()){
  ninjas.push(ninja);
}

ninjas;</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa7q2a1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">The <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninjas</kbd> array will contain only <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Yoshi</kbd>. This happens because the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">for-of</kbd> loop iterates over a generator until the generator says it’s done (without including the value passed along with done). This
               happens either when there’s no more code in the generator to execute, or when a <kbd class="epub__calibre15">return</kbd> statement is encountered.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa7qe3"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa7q3"/><b class="epub__calibre21">3 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">What’s the value of variables <kbd class="epub__calibre15">a1</kbd> and <kbd class="epub__calibre15">a2</kbd>, after running the following code?
            </p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e40841" class="epub__calibre5">function *Gen(val){
  val = yield val * 2;
  yield val;
}

let generator = Gen(2);
//4. The value of the first value passed in through next: 3 is ignored
//because the generator hasn't yet started its execution, and there
//is no waiting yield expression.
//Because the generator is created with val being 2
//the first yield occurs for val * 2, i.e. 2*2 == 4
let a1 = generator.next(3).value;
//5: passing in 5 as a argument to next
//means that the waiting yielded expression will get the value 5
//(yield val * 2) == 5
//because that value is then assigned to val, the next yield expression
//yield val;
//will return 5
let a2 = generator.next(5).value;</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa7qe4"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa7q4"/><b class="epub__calibre21">4 </b></p><p class="epub__noind"><a id="iddle1456"/><a id="iddle1813"/>What’s the output of the following code?
            </p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e40869" class="epub__calibre5">const promise = new Promise((resolve, reject) =&gt; {
  reject("Hattori"); //the promise was explicitly rejected
});

//the error handler will be invoked
promise.then(val =&gt; alert("Success: " + val))
       .catch(e =&gt; alert("Error: " + e));</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa7qe5"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa7q5"/><b class="epub__calibre21">5 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">What’s the output of the following code?</p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e40882" class="epub__calibre5">const promise = new Promise((resolve, reject) =&gt; {
  //the promise was explicitly resolved
  resolve("Hattori");
  //once a promise has settled, it can't be changed
  //rejecting it after 500ms will have no effect
  setTimeout(()=&gt; reject("Yoshi"), 500);
});

//the success handler will be invoked
promise.then(val =&gt; alert("Success: " + val))
       .catch(e =&gt; alert("Error: " + e));</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      
      
      
      <h3><a id="app03lev1sec6__title"/>Chapter 7. Object orientation with prototypes
      </h3>
      
      <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8"/></p>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8qe1"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8q1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">1 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Which of the following properties points to an object that will be searched if the target object doesn’t have the searched-for
               property?
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8q1a1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind"><kbd class="epub__calibre15">prototype</kbd> (option c)
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8qe2"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8q2"/><b class="epub__calibre21">2 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">What’s the value of variable <kbd class="epub__calibre15">a1</kbd> after the following code is executed?
            </p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e40925" class="epub__calibre5">function Ninja(){}
Ninja.prototype.talk = function (){
  return "Hello";
};

const ninja = new Ninja();
const a1 = ninja.talk(); //"Hello"</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8q2a2"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">The value of variable a1 will be <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Hello</kbd>. Even though the object <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninja</kbd> doesn’t possess the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">talk</kbd> method, its prototype does.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8qe3"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8q3"/><b class="epub__calibre21">3 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">What’s the value of <kbd class="epub__calibre15">a1</kbd> after running the following code?
            </p>
            
            
            <pre id="PLd0e40959" class="epub__calibre5">function Ninja(){}
Ninja.message = "Hello";

const ninja = new Ninja();

const a1 = ninja.message;</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8q3a3"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind"><a id="iddle1262"/>The value of variable <kbd class="epub__calibre15">a1</kbd> will be undefined. The <kbd class="epub__calibre15">message</kbd> property is defined in the constructor function <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Ninja</kbd>, and isn’t acessible through the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninja</kbd> object.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8qe4"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8q4"/><b class="epub__calibre21">4 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Explain the difference between the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">getFullName</kbd> method in these two code fragments:
            </p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e40999" class="epub__calibre5">//First fragment
function Person(firstName, lastName){
  this.firstName = firstName;
  this.lastName = lastName;

  this.getFullName = function () {
    return this.firstName + " " + this.lastName;
  }
}

//Second fragment
function Person(firstName, lastName) {
  this.firstName = firstName;
  this.lastName = lastName;
}

Person.prototype.getFullName = function () {
  return this.firstName + " " + this.lastName;
}</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8q4a4"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">In the first fragment, the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">getFullName</kbd> method is defined directly on the instance created with the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Person</kbd> constructor. Each object created with the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Person</kbd> constructor gets its own <kbd class="epub__calibre15">getFullName</kbd> method. In the second fragment, the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">getFullName</kbd> method is defined on the prototype of the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Person</kbd> function. All instances created with the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Person</kbd> function will have access to this single method.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8qe5"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8q5"/><b class="epub__calibre21">5 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">After running the following code, what will <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninja.constructor</kbd> point to?
            </p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e41043" class="epub__calibre5">function Person() { }
function Ninja() { }

const ninja = new Ninja();</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8q5a5"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">When accessing <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninja.constructor</kbd>, the constructor property is found on <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninja</kbd>’s prototype. Because <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninja</kbd> was created with the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Ninja</kbd> constructor function, the constructor property points to the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Ninja</kbd> function.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8qe6"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8q6"/><b class="epub__calibre21">6 </b></p><p class="epub__noind"><a id="iddle1679"/>After running the following code, what will <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninja.constructor</kbd> point to?
            </p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e41087" class="epub__calibre5">function Person() { }
function Ninja() { }
Ninja.prototype = new Person();
const ninja = new Ninja();</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8q6a6"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">The <kbd class="epub__calibre15">constructor</kbd> property is the property of the prototype object that was created with the constructor function. In this example, we override
               the built-in prototype of the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Ninja</kbd> function with a new <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Person</kbd> object. Therefore, when a <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninja</kbd> object is created with the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Ninja</kbd> constructor, its prototype is set to the new <kbd class="epub__calibre15">person</kbd> object. Finally, when we access the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">constructor</kbd> property on the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninja</kbd> object, because the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninja</kbd> object doesn’t have its own <kbd class="epub__calibre15">constructor</kbd> property, its prototype, the new <kbd class="epub__calibre15">person</kbd> object, is consulted. The <kbd class="epub__calibre15">person</kbd> object also doesn’t have a <kbd class="epub__calibre15">constructor</kbd> property, so its prototype, the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Person.prototype</kbd> object, is consulted. That object has a <kbd class="epub__calibre15">constructor</kbd> property, referencing the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Person</kbd> function. This example perfectly illustrates why we should be careful when using the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">constructor</kbd> property: Even though our <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninja</kbd> object was created with the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Ninja</kbd> function, the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">constructor</kbd> property, due to the hiccup of overriding the default <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Ninja.prototype</kbd>, points to the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Person</kbd> function.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8qe7"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8q7"/><b class="epub__calibre21">7 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Explain how the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">instanceof</kbd> operator works in the following example.
            </p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e41176" class="epub__calibre5">function Warrior() { }

function Samurai() { }
Samurai.prototype = new Warrior();

var samurai = new Samurai();

samurai instanceof Warrior; //Explain</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8q7a7"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">The <kbd class="epub__calibre15">instanceof</kbd> operator checks whether the prototype of the function on the right-hand side is in the prototype chain of the object on the
               left-hand side. The object on the left is created with the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Samurai</kbd> function, and its prototype has a new <kbd class="epub__calibre15">warrior</kbd> object, whose prototype is the prototype of the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Warrior</kbd> function (<kbd class="epub__calibre15">Warrior.prototype</kbd>). On the right we have the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Warrior</kbd> function. So in this example, the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">instanceof</kbd> operator will return <kbd class="epub__calibre15">true</kbd>, because the prototype of the function on the right, <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Warrior.prototype</kbd>, can be found in the prototype chain of the object on the left.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8qe8"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8q8"/><b class="epub__calibre21">8 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Translate the following ES6 code into ES5 code.</p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e41223" class="epub__calibre5"><b class="epub__calibre21">class</b> Warrior {
  constructor(weapon){
    this.weapon = weapon;
  }

  wield() {
    return "Wielding " + this.weapon;
  }

  static duel(warrior1, warrior2){
    return warrior1.wield() + " " + warrior2.wield();
  }
}</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa8q8a8"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind"><a id="iddle1025"/><a id="iddle1445"/><a id="iddle1819"/>We can translate the code in the following way:
            </p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e41263" class="epub__calibre5">function Warrior(weapon) {
  this.weapon = weapon;
}

Warrior.prototype.wield = function () {
  return "Wielding " + this.weapon;
};

Warrior.duel = function (warrior1, warrior2) {
  return warrior1.wield() + " " + warrior2.wield();
};</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      
      
      
      <h3><a id="app03lev1sec7__title"/>Chapter 8. Controlling access to objects
      </h3>
      
      <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa9"/></p>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa9qe1"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa9q1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">1 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">After running the following code, which of the following expressions will throw an exception and why?</p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e41287" class="epub__calibre5">const ninja = {
   get name() {
     return "Akiyama";
   }
}</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa9q1a1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Calling <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninja.name()</kbd> throws an exception because <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninja</kbd> doesn’t have a name method (option a). Accessing <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninja.name</kbd> in <kbd class="epub__calibre15">const name = ninja.name</kbd> works like a charm; the getter gets activated, and the variable name gets the value <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Akiyama</kbd>.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa9qe2"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa9q2"/><b class="epub__calibre21">2 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">In the following code, which mechanism allows getters to access a private object variable?</p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e41322" class="epub__calibre5">function Samurai() {
  const _weapon = "katana";
  Object.defineProperty(this, "weapon", {
    get: () =&gt; _weapon
  });
}
const samurai = new Samurai();
assert(samurai.weapon === "katana", "A katana wielding samurai");</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa9q2a2"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Closures allow getters to access private object variables. In this case, the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">get</kbd> method creates a closure around the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">_weapon</kbd> private variable defined in the constructor function, which keeps the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">_weapon</kbd> variable alive.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa9qe3"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa9q3"/><b class="epub__calibre21">3 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Which of the following assertions will pass?</p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e41352" class="epub__calibre5">const daimyo = { name: "Matsu", clan: "Takasu"};
const proxy = new Proxy(daimyo, {
  get: (target, key) =&gt; {
    if(key === "clan"){
      return "Tokugawa";
    }
  }
});

assert(daimyo.clan === "Takasu", "Matsu of clan Takasu");     <b class="epub__calibre21">//pass</b>
assert(proxy.clan === "Tokugawa", "Matsu of clan Tokugawa?"); <b class="epub__calibre21">//pass</b>

proxy.clan = "Tokugawa";

assert(daimyo.clan === "Takasu", "Matsu of clan Takasu");     <b class="epub__calibre21">//fail</b>
assert(proxy.clan === "Tokugawa", "Matsu of clan Tokugawa?"); <b class="epub__calibre21">//pass</b></pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa9q3a3"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">The first assertion passes because <kbd class="epub__calibre15">daimyo</kbd> has a <kbd class="epub__calibre15">clan</kbd> property with value <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Takasu</kbd>. The second assertion passes, because we access the property <kbd class="epub__calibre15">clan</kbd> through a proxy with a get trap that always returns <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Tokugawa</kbd> as the value of the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">clan</kbd> property.
            </p>
            
            <p class="epub__noind">When the expression <kbd class="epub__calibre15">proxy.clan = "Tokugawa"</kbd> is evaluated, the value <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Tokugawa</kbd> is stored in the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">daimyo</kbd>’s <kbd class="epub__calibre15">clan</kbd> property because the proxy doesn’t have a set trap, so the default action of setting the property is carried out on the target,
               <kbd class="epub__calibre15">daimyo</kbd> object.
            </p>
            
            <p class="epub__noind">The third assertion fails, because the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">daimyo</kbd>’s clan property has the value <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Tokugawa</kbd> and not <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Takasu</kbd>.
            </p>
            
            <p class="epub__noind">The fourth assertion passes, because the proxy always returns <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Tokugawa</kbd>, regardless of the value stored in the target object’s <kbd class="epub__calibre15">clan</kbd> property.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa9qe4"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa9q4"/><b class="epub__calibre21">4 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Which of the following assertions will pass?</p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e41440" class="epub__calibre5">const daimyo = { name: "Matsu", clan: "Takasu", armySize: 10000};
const proxy = new Proxy(daimyo, {
  set: (target, key, value) =&gt; {
    if(key === "armySize") {
      const number = Number.parseInt(value);
      if(!Number.isNaN(number)){
        target[key] = number;
      }
    } else {
        target[key] = value;
    }
  },
});
//pass
assert(daimyo.armySize === 10000, "Matsu has 10 000 men at arms");
//pass
assert(proxy.armySize === 10000, "Matsu has 10 000 men at arms");

proxy.armySize = "large";
assert(daimyo.armySize === "large", "Matsu has a large army"); <b class="epub__calibre21">//fail</b>

daimyo.armySize = "large";
assert(daimyo.armySize === "large", "Matsu has a large army");<b class="epub__calibre21">//pass</b></pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa9q4a4"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind"><a id="iddle1220"/><a id="iddle1448"/>The first assertion passes; the value of <kbd class="epub__calibre15">daimyo</kbd>’s <kbd class="epub__calibre15">armySize</kbd> property is <kbd class="epub__calibre15">10000</kbd>. The second assertion also passes; the proxy doesn’t have a get trap defined so the value of the target, <kbd class="epub__calibre15">daimyo</kbd>’s <kbd class="epub__calibre15">armySize</kbd> property, is returned.
            </p>
            
            <p class="epub__noind">When the expression <kbd class="epub__calibre15">proxy.armySize = "large";</kbd> is evaluated, the proxy’s set trap is activated. The setter checks whether the passed-in value is a number, and only if it
               is, the value is assigned to the target’s property. In this case, the passed-in value isn’t a number, so no changes are made
               to the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">armySize</kbd> property. For this reason, the third assertion, which assumes the change, fails.
            </p>
            
            <p class="epub__noind">The expression <kbd class="epub__calibre15">daimyo.armySize = "large";</kbd> directly writes to the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">armySize</kbd> property, bypassing the proxy. Therefore, the final assertion passes.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      
      
      
      <h3><a id="app03lev1sec8__title"/>Chapter 9. Dealing with collections
      </h3>
      
      <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa10"/></p>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa10qe1"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa10q1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">1 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">After running the following code, what’s the content of the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">samurai</kbd> array?
            </p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e41529" class="epub__calibre5">const samurai = ["Oda", "Tomoe"];
samurai[3] = "Hattori";</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa10q1a1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">The value of the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">samurai</kbd> is <kbd class="epub__calibre15">["Oda", "Tomoe", undefined, "Hattori"]</kbd>. The array starts with <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Oda</kbd> and <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Tomoe</kbd> at indexes <kbd class="epub__calibre15">0</kbd> and <kbd class="epub__calibre15">1</kbd>. We then add a new samurai, <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Hattori,</kbd> at index 3, which “expands” the array, and leaves index 2 with <kbd class="epub__calibre15">undefined</kbd>.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa10qe2"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa10q2"/><b class="epub__calibre21">2 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">After running the following code, what’s the content of the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninjas</kbd> array?
            </p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e41576" class="epub__calibre5">const ninjas = [];

ninjas.push("Yoshi");
ninjas.unshift("Hattori");

ninjas.length = 3;

ninjas.pop();</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa10q2a2"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">The value of <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninjas</kbd> is [<kbd class="epub__calibre15">"Hattori", "Yoshi"]</kbd>. We start with an empty array, <kbd class="epub__calibre15">push</kbd> adds <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Yoshi</kbd> to the end, and <kbd class="epub__calibre15">unshift</kbd> adds <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Hattori</kbd> to the beginning. Explicitly setting <kbd class="epub__calibre15">length</kbd> to <kbd class="epub__calibre15">3</kbd> expands the array with <kbd class="epub__calibre15">undefined</kbd> at index <kbd class="epub__calibre15">2</kbd>. Calling <kbd class="epub__calibre15">pop</kbd> removes that <kbd class="epub__calibre15">undefined</kbd> from the array, leaving only [<kbd class="epub__calibre15">"Hattori", "Yoshi"]</kbd>.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa10qe3"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa10q3"/><b class="epub__calibre21">3 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">After running the following code, what’s the content of the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">samurai</kbd> array?
            </p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e41639" class="epub__calibre5">const samurai = [];

samurai.push("Oda");
samurai.unshift("Tomoe");
samurai.splice(1, 0, "Hattori", "Takeda");
samurai.pop();</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa10q3a3"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">The value of <kbd class="epub__calibre15">samurai</kbd> is <kbd class="epub__calibre15">["Tomoe", "Hattori", "Takeda"]</kbd>. The array starts empty; <kbd class="epub__calibre15">push</kbd> adds <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Oda</kbd> to the end, and <kbd class="epub__calibre15">unshift</kbd> adds <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Tomoe</kbd> to the beginning; <kbd class="epub__calibre15">splice</kbd> removes the item at index <kbd class="epub__calibre15">1</kbd> (<kbd class="epub__calibre15">Oda</kbd>) and adds <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Hattori</kbd> and <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Takeda</kbd> instead.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa10qe4"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa10q4"/><b class="epub__calibre21">4 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">After running the following code, what’s stored in the variables <kbd class="epub__calibre15">first</kbd>, <kbd class="epub__calibre15">second</kbd>, and <kbd class="epub__calibre15">third</kbd>?
            </p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e41701" class="epub__calibre5">const ninjas = [{name:"Yoshi", age: 18},
    {name:"Hattori", age: 19},
    {name:"Yagyu", age: 20}];

const first = persons.map(ninja =&gt; ninja.age);
const second = first.filter(age =&gt; age % 2 == 0);
const third = first.reduce((aggregate, item) =&gt;  aggregate + item, 0);</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa10q4a4"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">first: [18, 19, 20]; second: [18, 20]; third: 57</p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa10qe5"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa10q5"/><b class="epub__calibre21">5 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">After running the following code, what’s stored in the variables <kbd class="epub__calibre15">first</kbd> and <kbd class="epub__calibre15">second</kbd>?
            </p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e41727" class="epub__calibre5">const ninjas = [{ name: "Yoshi", age: 18 },
               { name: "Hattor", age: 19 },
               { name: "Yagyu", age: 20 }];

const first = ninjas.some(ninja =&gt; ninja.age % 2 == 0);
const second = ninjas.every(ninja =&gt; ninja.age % 2 == 0);</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa10q5a5"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">first: true; second: false</p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa10qe6"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa10q6"/><b class="epub__calibre21">6 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Which of the following assertions will pass?</p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e41747" class="epub__calibre5">const samuraiClanMap = new Map();

const samurai1 = { name: "Toyotomi"};
const samurai2 = { name: "Takeda"};
const samurai3 = { name: "Akiyama"};

const oda = { clan: "Oda"};
const tokugawa = { clan: "Tokugawa"};
const takeda ={clan: "Takeda"};
samuraiClanMap.set(samurai1, oda);
samuraiClanMap.set(samurai2, tokugawa);
samuraiClanMap.set(samurai2, takeda);

assert(samuraiClanMap.size === 3, "There are three mappings");
assert(samuraiClanMap.has(samurai1), "The first samurai has a mapping");
assert(samuraiClanMap.has(samurai3), "The third samurai has a mapping");</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa10q6a6"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind"><a id="iddle1457"/><a id="iddle1946"/><a id="iddle1961"/>The first assertion fails, because a mapping for <kbd class="epub__calibre15">samurai2</kbd> was created twice. The second assertion passes, because a mapping for <kbd class="epub__calibre15">samurai1</kbd> was added. And the third assertion fails, because a mapping for <kbd class="epub__calibre15">samurai3</kbd> was never created.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa10qe7"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa10q7"/><b class="epub__calibre21">7 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Which of the following assertions will pass?</p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e41799" class="epub__calibre5">const samurai = new Set("Toyotomi", "Takeda", "Akiyama", "Akiyama");
assert(samurai.size === 4, "There are four samurai in the set");

samurai.add("Akiyama");
assert(samurai.size === 5, "There are five samurai in the set");

assert(samurai.has("Toyotomi", "Toyotomi is in!");
assert(samurai.has("Hattori", "Hattori is in!");</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa10q7a7"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">The first assertion fails because <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Akiyama</kbd> is added only once to the set. The second assertion also fails, because trying to add <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Akiyama</kbd> once more will not change the set (nor its length). The last two assertions will pass.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      
      
      
      <h3><a id="app03lev1sec9__title"/>Chapter 10. Wrangling regular expressions
      </h3>
      
      <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11"/></p>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11qe1"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11q1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">1 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">In JavaScript, regular expressions can be created with which of the following?</p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11q1a1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Regular expression literals (option a) and by using the built-in <kbd class="epub__calibre15">RegExp</kbd> constructor (option B). Answer c is incorrect; no built-in <kbd class="epub__calibre15">RegularExpression</kbd> constructor exists.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11qe2"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11q2"/><b class="epub__calibre21">2 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Which of the following is a regular expression literal?</p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11q2a2"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">In JavaScript, a regular expression literal is enclosed in two forward slashes: <kbd class="epub__calibre15">/test/</kbd> (option a).
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11qe3"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11q3"/><b class="epub__calibre21">3 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Choose the correct regular expression flags.</p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11q3a3"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">With regular expression literals, expression flags are placed after the closing forward slash: <kbd class="epub__calibre15">/test/g</kbd> (option a). With <kbd class="epub__calibre15">RegExp</kbd> constructors, they’re passed as a second argument: <kbd class="epub__calibre15">new RegExp ("test", "gi");</kbd> (option c).
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11qe4"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11q4"/><b class="epub__calibre21">4 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">The regular expression <kbd class="epub__calibre15">/def/</kbd> matches which of the following strings?
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11q4a4"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">The regular expression <kbd class="epub__calibre15">/def/</kbd> matches only <kbd class="epub__calibre15">def</kbd>: <i class="epub__calibre6">d</i> followed by <i class="epub__calibre6">e</i>, followed by <i class="epub__calibre6">f</i> (option b).
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11qe5"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11q5"/><b class="epub__calibre21">5 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">The regular expression <kbd class="epub__calibre15">/[^abc]/</kbd> matches which of the following?
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11q5a5"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind"><a id="iddle1022"/><a id="iddle1447"/><a id="iddle1773"/><a id="iddle1866"/>The regular expression <kbd class="epub__calibre15">/[^abc]/</kbd> matches one of the strings <kbd class="epub__calibre15">d</kbd>, <kbd class="epub__calibre15">e</kbd>, <kbd class="epub__calibre15">f</kbd>—one character that isn’t <i class="epub__calibre6">a</i>, <i class="epub__calibre6">b</i>, or <i class="epub__calibre6">c</i> (option b).
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11qe6"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11q6"/><b class="epub__calibre21">6 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Which of the following regular expressions matches the string <kbd class="epub__calibre15">hello</kbd>?
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11q6a6"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Options a, b, and c match. <kbd class="epub__calibre15">/hello/</kbd> matches only the exact string <kbd class="epub__calibre15">hello</kbd>. <kbd class="epub__calibre15">/hell?o/</kbd> matches either <kbd class="epub__calibre15">hello</kbd> or <kbd class="epub__calibre15">helo</kbd> (the second <kbd class="epub__calibre15">l</kbd> is optional). <kbd class="epub__calibre15">/hel*o/</kbd>, after the first <kbd class="epub__calibre15">l</kbd>, matches any number of the letter <kbd class="epub__calibre15">l</kbd>.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11qe7"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11q7"/><b class="epub__calibre21">7 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">The regular expression <kbd class="epub__calibre15">/(cd)+(de)*/</kbd> matches which of the following strings?
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11q7a7"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Options a, c, d, and f are correct. <kbd class="epub__calibre15">/(cd)+(de)*/</kbd> matches one or more occurrences of <kbd class="epub__calibre15">cd</kbd> followed by any number of occurrences of <kbd class="epub__calibre15">de</kbd>.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11qe8"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11q8"/><b class="epub__calibre21">8 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">In regular expressions, we can express alternatives with which of the following?</p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11q8a8"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">We use the pipe character, <kbd class="epub__calibre15">|</kbd>, to express alternatives in regular expressions (option c).
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11qe9"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11q9"/><b class="epub__calibre21">9 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">In the regular expression <kbd class="epub__calibre15">/([0-9])2/</kbd>, we can reference the first matched digit with which of the following?
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11q9a9"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind"><kbd class="epub__calibre15">\1</kbd> (option d)
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11qe10"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11q10"/><b class="epub__calibre21">10 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">The regular expression <kbd class="epub__calibre15">/([0-5])6\1/</kbd> will match which of the following?
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11q10a10"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">In the regular expression <kbd class="epub__calibre15">/([0-5])6\1/</kbd>, the first character is a digit from 0–5, the second character is the digit 6, and the third character is the first matched
               digit, so both <kbd class="epub__calibre15">060</kbd> and <kbd class="epub__calibre15">565</kbd> match (options a and d).
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11qe11"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11q11"/><b class="epub__calibre21">11 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">The regular expression <kbd class="epub__calibre15">/(?:ninja)-(trick)?-\1/</kbd> will match which of the following?
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11q11a11"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">In the regular expression <kbd class="epub__calibre15">/(?:ninja)-(trick)?-\1/</kbd>, the first group <kbd class="epub__calibre15">(?:ninja)</kbd> is a noncapturing one, whereas the second group is a capturing one, which is optional <kbd class="epub__calibre15">(trick)?</kbd>. But if this second group is found, in the end we have a backreference to it. Therefore, <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninja-</kbd> and <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninja-trick-trick</kbd> match (options a and c).
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11qe12"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11q12"/><b class="epub__calibre21">12 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">What is the result of executing <kbd class="epub__calibre15">"012675".replace(/0-5/g, "a")</kbd>?
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa11q12a12"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">The code replaces all occurrences of digits from 0 to 5 with the letter a, so <kbd class="epub__calibre15">aaa67a</kbd> results (option a).
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      
      
      
      <h3><a id="app03lev1sec10__title"/>Chapter 11. Code modularization techniques
      </h3>
      
      <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa12"/></p>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa12qe1"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa12q1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">1 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Which mechanism enables private module variables in the module pattern?</p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa12q1a1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">In the module pattern, closures allow us to hide module internals: The methods of the module’s public API keep the module
               internals alive (option b).
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa12qe2"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa12q2"/><b class="epub__calibre21">2 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">In the following code that uses ES6 modules, which identifiers can be accessed if the module is imported?</p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e42200" class="epub__calibre5">const spy = "Yagyu";
function command(){
  return general + " commands you to wage war!";
}
export const general = "Minamoto";</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa12q2a2"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind"><a id="iddle1350"/><a id="iddle1450"/>From outside the module, we can access only the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">general</kbd> identifier, because it’s the only identifier that has been explicitly exported (option c).
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa12qe3"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa12q3"/><b class="epub__calibre21">3 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">In the following code that uses ES6 modules, which identifiers can be accessed when the module is imported?</p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e42240" class="epub__calibre5">const ninja = "Yagyu";
function command(){
  return general + " commands you to wage war!";
}
const general  = "Minamoto";

export {ninja as spy};</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa12q3a3"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">From outside the module, we can access only the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">spy</kbd> identifier: This is the only identifier that has been exported as an alias of the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninja</kbd> variable (option a).
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa12qe4"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa12q4"/><b class="epub__calibre21">4 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Which of the following imports are allowed?</p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e42266" class="epub__calibre5">//File: personnel.js
const ninja = "Yagyu";
function command(){
  return general + " commands you to wage war!";
}
const general  = "Minamoto";

export {ninja as spy};</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa12q4a4"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">The first import isn’t allowed because the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">personnel</kbd> module doesn’t export <kbd class="epub__calibre15">ninja</kbd> and <kbd class="epub__calibre15">general</kbd> identifiers (option a). The second import is allowed because we import the whole module, which is accessible through the
               object <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Personnel</kbd> (option b). The third import is also allowed, because we import the exported <kbd class="epub__calibre15">spy</kbd> identifier (option c).
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa12qe5"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa12q5"/><b class="epub__calibre21">5 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">If we have the following module code, which statement will import the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Ninja</kbd> class?
            </p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e42304" class="epub__calibre5">//Ninja.js
export default class Ninja {
  skulk(){ return "skulking"; }
}</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa12q5a5"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">The first import is allowed: We import the default export (option a). The second import is allowed: We import the whole module
               (option b). The third import isn’t allowed because it isn’t syntactically correct (after the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">*</kbd> should come the “as Name” part) (option c).
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      
      
      
      <h3><a id="app03lev1sec11__title"/>Chapter 12. Working the DOM
      </h3>
      
      <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa13"/></p>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa13qe1"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa13q1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">1 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">In the following code, which of the following assertions will pass?</p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e42337" class="epub__calibre5">&lt;div id="samurai"&gt;&lt;/div&gt;
&lt;script&gt;
  const element = document.querySelector("#samurai");
  assert(element.id === "samurai", "property id is samurai");
  assert(element.getAttribute("id") === "samurai",
         "attribute id is samurai");

  element.id = "newSamurai";

  assert(element.id === "newSamurai", "property id is newSamurai");
  assert(element.getAttribute("id") === "newSamurai",
         "attribute id is newSamurai");
&lt;/script&gt;</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa13q1a1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind"><a id="iddle1128"/><a id="iddle1430"/><a id="iddle1451"/><a id="iddle1612"/><a id="iddle1650"/>In this code, all assertions pass. The <kbd class="epub__calibre15">id</kbd> attribute and the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">id</kbd> property are linked; a change to one of them is reflected in the other.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa13qe2"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa13q2"/><b class="epub__calibre21">2 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Given the following code, how can we access the element’s <kbd class="epub__calibre15">border-width</kbd> style property?
            </p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e42399" class="epub__calibre5">&lt;div id="element" style="border-width: 1px;
                         border-style:solid; border-color: red"&gt;
&lt;/div&gt;
&lt;script&gt;
  const element = document.querySelector("#element");
&lt;/script&gt;</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa13q2a2"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">The <kbd class="epub__calibre15">element.border-width expression</kbd> doesn’t make much sense. It calculates the difference between <kbd class="epub__calibre15">element.border</kbd> and a variable <kbd class="epub__calibre15">width</kbd>, which definitely isn’t something we want. The next option, <kbd class="epub__calibre15">element.getAttribute ("border-width");</kbd>, fetches the attribute of the HTML element, and not the style property. Finally, the last two options give the value of <kbd class="epub__calibre15">1px</kbd> (options c and d).
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa13qe3"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa13q3"/><b class="epub__calibre21">3 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Which built-in method can get all styles applied to a certain element (styles provided by the browser, styles applied via
               style sheets, and properties set through the style attribute)?
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa13q3a3"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Only the last option, <kbd class="epub__calibre15">getComputedStyle</kbd>, is a built-in method that can be used to get the computed style of a certain HTML element (option c). The other three methods
               aren’t included in the standard API.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa13qe4"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa13q4"/><b class="epub__calibre21">4 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">When does layout trashing occur?</p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa13q4a4"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Layout trashing occurs when our code performs a series of consecutive reads and writes to DOM, each time forcing the browser
               to recalculate the layout information. This leads to slower, less responsive web applications.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      
      
      
      <h3><a id="app03lev1sec12__title"/>Chapter 13. Surviving events
      </h3>
      
      <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa14"/></p>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa14qe1"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa14q1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">1 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Why is it important that adding tasks into the task queue happens outside the event loop?</p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa14q1a1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">If the process of adding tasks into the task queue were part of the event loop, any events that occur while JavaScript code
               is being executed would be ignored. This would definitely be a bad idea.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa14qe2"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa14q2"/><b class="epub__calibre21">2 </b></p><p class="epub__noind"><a id="iddle2024"/><a id="iddle2037"/>Why is it important that each iteration of the event loop doesn’t take much more than about 16 ms?
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa14q2a2"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">To achieve smooth-running applications, the browser tries to perform rendering around 60 times per second. Because rendering
               is performed at the end of the event loop, each iteration shouldn’t last much longer than 16 ms, unless we want to create
               slow and jagged applications.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa14qe3"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa14q3"/><b class="epub__calibre21">3 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">What’s the output from running the following code for 2 seconds?</p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e42514" class="epub__calibre5">setTimeout(function(){
  console.log("Timeout ");
}, 1000);

setInterval(function(){
  console.log("Interval ");
}, 500);</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa14q3a3"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind"><kbd class="epub__calibre15">Interval Timeout Interval Interval Interval</kbd> (option b). The <kbd class="epub__calibre15">setInterval</kbd> method calls the handler with at least the fixed delay between each call, until the interval is explicitly cleared. The <kbd class="epub__calibre15">setTimeout</kbd> method, on the other hand, calls the callback only once, after the specified delay has elapsed. In this example, first the
               <kbd class="epub__calibre15">setInterval</kbd> callback is fired once after 500 ms. Then the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">setTimeout</kbd> callback is invoked after 1000 ms, and another <kbd class="epub__calibre15">setInterval</kbd> immediately after. Our examination stops with two more <kbd class="epub__calibre15">setInterval</kbd> callback invocations, one at 1500 ms, and the other at 2000 ms.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa14qe4"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa14q4"/><b class="epub__calibre21">4 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">What’s the output from running the following code for 2 seconds?</p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e42554" class="epub__calibre5">const timeoutId = setTimeout(function(){
  console.log("Timeout ");
}, 1000);

setInterval(function(){
  console.log("Interval ");
}, 500);

clearTimeout(timeoutId);</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa14q4a4"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind"><kbd class="epub__calibre15">Interval Interval Interval Interval</kbd> (option c). The <kbd class="epub__calibre15">setTimeout</kbd> callback is cleared before it has the chance to fire, so in this case we have only four executions of the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">setInterval</kbd> callback.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa14qe5"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa14q5"/><b class="epub__calibre21">5 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">What’s the output from running the following code and clicking the element with the ID <kbd class="epub__calibre15">inner</kbd>?
            </p>
            
            <pre id="PLd0e42585" class="epub__calibre5">&lt;body&gt;
  &lt;div id="outer"&gt;
    &lt;div id="inner"&gt;&lt;/div&gt;
  &lt;/div&gt;
  &lt;script&gt;
    const innerElement = document.querySelector("#inner");
    const outerElement = document.querySelector("#outer");
    const bodyElement = document.querySelector("body");
    innerElement.addEventListener("click", function(){
      console.log("Inner");
    });

    outerElement.addEventListener("click", function(){
      console.log("Outer");
    }, true);

    bodyElement.addEventListener("click", function(){
      console.log("Body");
    });
  &lt;script&gt;
&lt;/body&gt;</pre>
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa14q5a5"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind"><a id="iddle1137"/><a id="iddle1161"/><a id="iddle1449"/><kbd class="epub__calibre15">Outer Inner Body</kbd> (option c). The click handlers on the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">innerElement</kbd> and the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">bodyElement</kbd> are registered in bubbling mode, whereas the click handler on the <kbd class="epub__calibre15">outerElement</kbd> is registered in capturing mode. When processing the event, the event first trickles down from the top and calls all event
               handlers in capturing mode. The first message will be <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Outer</kbd>. After the event target is reached, in our case the element with ID <kbd class="epub__calibre15">inner</kbd>, the event bubbling takes place, and the event bubbles up. Therefore, the second message will be <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Inner</kbd>, and the third one will be <kbd class="epub__calibre15">Body</kbd>.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      
      
      
      <h3><a id="app03lev1sec13__title"/>Chapter 14. Developing cross-browser strategies
      </h3>
      
      <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa15"/></p>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa15qe1"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa15q1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">1 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">What should we take into account when deciding which browsers to support?</p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa15q1a1"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">When deciding which browsers to support, we should at least take into account the following:</p>
            
            <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
            <ul class="epub__calibre19">
               
               <li class="epub__calibre20">The expectations and needs of the target audience
                  
               </li>
               
               <li class="epub__calibre20">The market share of the browser
                  
               </li>
               
               <li class="epub__calibre20">The amount of effort necessary to support the browser
                  
               </li>
               
            </ul>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa15qe2"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa15q2"/><b class="epub__calibre21">2 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Explain the problem of greedy IDs.</p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa15q2a2"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">When working with form elements, the browser adds properties to the form element for each descendent element with an ID, so
               that we can access these elements easily through the form element. Unfortunately, this can override some of the built-in form
               properties such as <kbd class="epub__calibre15">action</kbd> or <kbd class="epub__calibre15">submit</kbd>.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa15qe3"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa15q3"/><b class="epub__calibre21">3 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">What is feature detection?</p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa15q3a3"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">Feature detection works by determining whether a certain object or object property exists, and if so, assumes that it provides
               the implied functionality. Instead of testing whether the user is using a particular browser and then implementing work-arounds
               based on that information, we test whether a certain feature works as it’s supposed to.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__calibre14">
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa15qe4"/></p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa15q4"/><b class="epub__calibre21">4 </b></p><p class="epub__noind">What is a browser polyfill?</p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"><a id="app03qa15q4a4"/><b class="epub__calibre21">A: </b></p><p class="epub__noind">If we want to use a certain functionality that’s not supported by all targeted browsers, we can use feature detection. If
               a current browser doesn’t support a certain functionality, we provide our own implementation, and this is called polyfilling.
            </p>
         <p class="epub__calibre18"/>
      </blockquote>
      
      
      </div>


</body>
</html>
