<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <title>Higher-Order Functions</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <article>

<h1 id="higher_order"><span class="chap_num">Chapter 5</span>Higher-Order Functions</h1>
<blockquote>
<p>There are two ways of constructing a software
design: One way is to make it so simple that there are obviously no
deficiencies, and the other way is to make it so complicated that
there are no obvious deficiencies.</p>
 <footer>C.A.R. Hoare, <cite>1980 ACM Turing Award Lecture</cite></footer>
</blockquote>
<p>A large program is a costly program, and not just
because of the time it takes to build. Size almost always involves
complexity, and complexity confuses programmers. Confused
programmers, in turn, tend to introduce mistakes (<em>bugs</em>) into
programs. A large program also provides a lot of space for these bugs
to hide, making them hard to find.</p>
<p>Let&#8217;s briefly go back to the final two example
programs in the introduction. The first is self-contained and six
lines long.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">total</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-number">0</span>, <span class="cm-variable">count</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-number">1</span>;
<span class="cm-keyword">while</span> (<span class="cm-variable">count</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;=</span> <span class="cm-number">10</span>) {
  <span class="cm-variable">total</span> <span class="cm-operator">+=</span> <span class="cm-variable">count</span>;
  <span class="cm-variable">count</span> <span class="cm-operator">+=</span> <span class="cm-number">1</span>;
}
<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">total</span>);</pre>
<p>The second relies on two external functions and is one line long.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">sum</span>(<span class="cm-variable">range</span>(<span class="cm-number">1</span>, <span class="cm-number">10</span>)));</pre>
<p>Which one is more likely to contain a bug?</p>
<p>If we count the size of the definitions of <code>sum</code> and
<code>range</code>, the second program is also big—even bigger than the first.
But still, I&#8217;d argue that it is more likely to be correct.</p>
<p>It is more likely to
be correct because the solution is expressed in a vocabulary that
corresponds to the problem being solved. Summing a range of
numbers isn&#8217;t about loops and counters. It is about ranges and sums.</p>
<p>The definitions of this vocabulary (the functions <code>sum</code> and <code>range</code>)
will still involve loops, counters, and other incidental details. But
because they are expressing simpler concepts than the program as a
whole, they are easier to get right.</p>
<h2>Abstraction</h2>
<p>In the context of programming, these kinds of vocabularies are usually
called <em>abstractions</em>. Abstractions hide details and give us the
ability to talk about problems at a higher (or more abstract) level.</p>
<p>As an analogy, compare these two
recipes for pea soup:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>Put 1 cup of dried peas per person into a container. Add water until
the peas are well covered. Leave the peas in water for at least 12 hours.
Take the peas out of the water and put them in a cooking pan. Add 4
cups of water per person. Cover the pan and keep the peas
simmering for two hours. Take half an onion per person. Cut it into
pieces with a knife. Add it to the peas. Take a stalk of celery per
person. Cut it into pieces with a knife. Add it to the peas. Take a
carrot per person. Cut it into pieces. With a knife! Add it to the
peas. Cook for 10 more minutes.</p>

</blockquote>
<p>And the second recipe:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>Per person: 1 cup dried split peas, half a chopped onion, a stalk of
celery, and a carrot.</p>
<p>Soak peas for 12 hours. Simmer for 2 hours in 4 cups of water
(per person). Chop and add vegetables. Cook for 10 more minutes.</p>

</blockquote>
<p>The second is shorter and easier to interpret. But
you do need to understand a few more cooking-related words—<em>soak</em>,
<em>simmer</em>, <em>chop</em>, and, I guess, <em>vegetable</em>.</p>
<p>When programming, we can&#8217;t rely on all the words we need to be waiting
for us in the dictionary. Thus, you might fall into the pattern of the
first recipe—work out the precise steps the computer has to perform,
one by one, blind to the higher-level concepts that they express.</p>
<p>It has to become second nature, for a programmer, to
notice when a concept is begging to be abstracted into a new word.</p>
<h2>Abstracting array traversal</h2>
<p>Plain functions, as we&#8217;ve seen them so far, are a good
way to build abstractions. But sometimes they fall short.</p>
<p>In the <a href="04_data.xhtml#data">previous chapter</a>, this
type of <code>for</code> loop made several appearances:</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">array</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> [<span class="cm-number">1</span>, <span class="cm-number">2</span>, <span class="cm-number">3</span>];
<span class="cm-keyword">for</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">i</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-number">0</span>; <span class="cm-variable">i</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-variable">array</span>.<span class="cm-property">length</span>; <span class="cm-variable">i</span><span class="cm-operator">++</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">current</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">array</span>[<span class="cm-variable">i</span>];
  <span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">current</span>);
}</pre>
<p>It&#8217;s trying to say, “For
each element in the array, log it to the console”. But it uses a
roundabout way that involves a counter variable <code>i</code>, a check against
the array&#8217;s length, and an extra variable declaration to pick out the
current element. Apart from being a bit of an eyesore, this provides a
lot of space for potential mistakes. We might accidentally reuse the
<code>i</code> variable, misspell <code>length</code> as <code>lenght</code>, confuse the <code>i</code> and <code>current</code>
variables, and so on.</p>
<p>So let&#8217;s try to abstract this into a function. Can you think of a way?</p>
<p>Well, it&#8217;s easy to write a function that goes over an array and calls
<code>console.log</code> on every element.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">logEach</span>(<span class="cm-def">array</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">for</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">i</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-number">0</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">i</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">array</span>.<span class="cm-property">length</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">i</span><span class="cm-operator">++</span>)
    <span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">array</span>[<span class="cm-variable-2">i</span>]);
}</pre>
<p id="forEach">But what
if we want to do something other than logging the elements? Since
“doing something” can be represented as a function and functions are
just values, we can pass our action as a function value.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">forEach</span>(<span class="cm-def">array</span>, <span class="cm-def">action</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">for</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">i</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-number">0</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">i</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">array</span>.<span class="cm-property">length</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">i</span><span class="cm-operator">++</span>)
    <span class="cm-variable-2">action</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">array</span>[<span class="cm-variable-2">i</span>]);
}

<span class="cm-variable">forEach</span>([<span class="cm-string">"Wampeter"</span>, <span class="cm-string">"Foma"</span>, <span class="cm-string">"Granfalloon"</span>], <span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>);
<span class="cm-comment">// → Wampeter</span>
<span class="cm-comment">// → Foma</span>
<span class="cm-comment">// → Granfalloon</span></pre>
<p>(In some browsers, calling <code>console.log</code> in this way does not work.
You can use <code>alert</code> instead of <code>console.log</code> if this example fails to
work.)</p>
<p>Often, you don&#8217;t pass a predefined function to <code>forEach</code> but create
a function value on the spot instead.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">numbers</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> [<span class="cm-number">1</span>, <span class="cm-number">2</span>, <span class="cm-number">3</span>, <span class="cm-number">4</span>, <span class="cm-number">5</span>], <span class="cm-variable">sum</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-number">0</span>;
<span class="cm-variable">forEach</span>(<span class="cm-variable">numbers</span>, <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">number</span>) {
  <span class="cm-variable">sum</span> <span class="cm-operator">+=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">number</span>;
});
<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">sum</span>);
<span class="cm-comment">// → 15</span></pre>
<p>This looks quite a lot like the
classical <code>for</code> loop, with its body written as a block below it.
However, now the body is inside the function value, as well as
inside the parentheses of the call to <code>forEach</code>. This is why it
has to be closed with the closing brace <em>and</em> closing parenthesis.</p>
<p>Using this pattern, we can
specify a variable name for the current element (<code>number</code>), rather
than having to pick it out of the array manually.</p>
<p>In fact, we don&#8217;t need to write <code>forEach</code>
ourselves. It is available as a standard method on arrays. Since the
array is already provided as the thing the method acts on, <code>forEach</code>
takes only one required argument: the function to be executed for each
element.</p>
<p>To illustrate how helpful this is, let&#8217;s look back at a function
from <a href="04_data.xhtml#analysis">the previous chapter</a>. It contains two
array-traversing loops.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">gatherCorrelations</span>(<span class="cm-def">journal</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">phis</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> {};
  <span class="cm-keyword">for</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">entry</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-number">0</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">entry</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">journal</span>.<span class="cm-property">length</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">entry</span><span class="cm-operator">++</span>) {
    <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">events</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">journal</span>[<span class="cm-variable-2">entry</span>].<span class="cm-property">events</span>;
    <span class="cm-keyword">for</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">i</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-number">0</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">i</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">events</span>.<span class="cm-property">length</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">i</span><span class="cm-operator">++</span>) {
      <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">event</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">events</span>[<span class="cm-variable-2">i</span>];
      <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-operator">!</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">event</span> <span class="cm-keyword">in</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">phis</span>))
        <span class="cm-variable-2">phis</span>[<span class="cm-variable-2">event</span>] <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">phi</span>(<span class="cm-variable">tableFor</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">event</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">journal</span>));
    }
  }
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">phis</span>;
}</pre>
<p>Working with <code>forEach</code> makes it slightly shorter
and quite a bit cleaner.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">gatherCorrelations</span>(<span class="cm-def">journal</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">phis</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> {};
  <span class="cm-variable-2">journal</span>.<span class="cm-property">forEach</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">entry</span>) {
    <span class="cm-variable-2">entry</span>.<span class="cm-property">events</span>.<span class="cm-property">forEach</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">event</span>) {
      <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-operator">!</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">event</span> <span class="cm-keyword">in</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">phis</span>))
        <span class="cm-variable-2">phis</span>[<span class="cm-variable-2">event</span>] <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">phi</span>(<span class="cm-variable">tableFor</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">event</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">journal</span>));
    });
  });
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">phis</span>;
}</pre>
<h2>Higher-order functions</h2>
<p>Functions that
operate on other functions, either by taking them as arguments or by
returning them, are called <em>higher-order functions</em>. If you have
already accepted the fact that functions are regular values, there is
nothing particularly remarkable about the fact that such functions
exist. The term comes from mathematics, where the distinction
between functions and other values is taken more seriously.</p>
<p>Higher-order functions allow us to abstract over
<em>actions</em>, not just values. They come in several forms. For example,
you can have functions that create new functions.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">greaterThan</span>(<span class="cm-def">n</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">m</span>) { <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">m</span> <span class="cm-operator">></span> <span class="cm-variable-2">n</span>; };
}
<span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">greaterThan10</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">greaterThan</span>(<span class="cm-number">10</span>);
<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">greaterThan10</span>(<span class="cm-number">11</span>));
<span class="cm-comment">// → true</span></pre>
<p>And you can have functions that change other functions.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">noisy</span>(<span class="cm-def">f</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">arg</span>) {
    <span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-string">"calling with"</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">arg</span>);
    <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">val</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">f</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">arg</span>);
    <span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-string">"called with"</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">arg</span>, <span class="cm-string">"- got"</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">val</span>);
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">val</span>;
  };
}
<span class="cm-variable">noisy</span>(<span class="cm-variable">Boolean</span>)(<span class="cm-number">0</span>);
<span class="cm-comment">// → calling with 0</span>
<span class="cm-comment">// → called with 0 - got false</span></pre>
<p>You can even write functions that provide new types of control flow.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">unless</span>(<span class="cm-def">test</span>, <span class="cm-def">then</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-operator">!</span><span class="cm-variable-2">test</span>) <span class="cm-variable-2">then</span>();
}
<span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">repeat</span>(<span class="cm-def">times</span>, <span class="cm-def">body</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">for</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">i</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-number">0</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">i</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">times</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">i</span><span class="cm-operator">++</span>) <span class="cm-variable-2">body</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">i</span>);
}

<span class="cm-variable">repeat</span>(<span class="cm-number">3</span>, <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">n</span>) {
  <span class="cm-variable">unless</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">n</span> <span class="cm-operator">%</span> <span class="cm-number">2</span>, <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>() {
    <span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">n</span>, <span class="cm-string">"is even"</span>);
  });
});
<span class="cm-comment">// → 0 is even</span>
<span class="cm-comment">// → 2 is even</span></pre>
<p>The lexical scoping
rules that we discussed in <a href="03_functions.xhtml#scoping">Chapter 3</a>
work to our advantage when using functions in this way. In the previous example, the <code>n</code> variable is a parameter to the outer function.
Because the inner function lives inside the environment of the outer
one, it can use <code>n</code>. The bodies of such inner functions can access the
variables around them. They can play a role similar to the <code>{}</code> blocks
used in regular loops and conditional statements. An important
difference is that variables declared inside inner functions do not
end up in the environment of the outer function. And that is usually a
good thing.</p>
<h2>Passing along arguments</h2>
<p>The <code>noisy</code> function
defined earlier, which wraps its argument in another function, has a rather
serious deficit.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">noisy</span>(<span class="cm-def">f</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">arg</span>) {
    <span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-string">"calling with"</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">arg</span>);
    <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">val</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">f</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">arg</span>);
    <span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-string">"called with"</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">arg</span>, <span class="cm-string">"- got"</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">val</span>);
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">val</span>;
  };
}</pre>
<p>If <code>f</code> takes more than one parameter, it gets only the first one.
We could add a bunch of arguments to the inner function (<code>arg1</code>,
<code>arg2</code>, and so on) and pass them all to <code>f</code>, but it is not clear how many
would be enough. This solution would also deprive <code>f</code> of the
information in <code>arguments.length</code>. Since we&#8217;d always pass the same
number of arguments, it wouldn&#8217;t know how many arguments were
originally given.</p>
<p>For
these kinds of situations, JavaScript functions have an <code>apply</code>
method. You pass it an array (or array-like object) of arguments, and
it will call the function with those arguments.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">transparentWrapping</span>(<span class="cm-def">f</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>() {
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">f</span>.<span class="cm-property">apply</span>(<span class="cm-atom">null</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">arguments</span>);
  };
}</pre>
<p>That&#8217;s a useless function, but it shows the pattern we are
interested in—the function it returns passes all of the given
arguments, and only those arguments, to <code>f</code>. It does this by passing
its own <code>arguments</code> object to <code>apply</code>. The first argument to <code>apply</code>,
for which we are passing <code>null</code> here, can be used to simulate a
method call. We will come back to that in the
<a href="06_object.xhtml#call_method">next chapter</a>.</p>
<h2>JSON</h2>
<p>Higher-order functions that somehow apply a function to the
elements of an array are widely used in JavaScript. The <code>forEach</code>
method is the most primitive such function. There are a number of
other variants available as methods on arrays. To familiarize
ourselves with them, let&#8217;s play around with another data set.</p>
<p>A few years ago, someone crawled through a lot
of archives and put together a book on the history of my family name
(Haverbeke—meaning Oatbrook). I opened it hoping to find
knights, pirates, and alchemists ... but the book turns out to be
mostly full of Flemish farmers. For my amusement, I extracted the
information on my direct ancestors and put it into a
computer-readable format.</p>
<p>The file I created looks something like
this:</p>
<pre>[
  {<span class="cm-string cm-property">"name"</span>: <span class="cm-string">"Emma de Milliano"</span>, <span class="cm-string cm-property">"sex"</span>: <span class="cm-string">"f"</span>,
   <span class="cm-string cm-property">"born"</span>: <span class="cm-number">1876</span>, <span class="cm-string cm-property">"died"</span>: <span class="cm-number">1956</span>,
   <span class="cm-string cm-property">"father"</span>: <span class="cm-string">"Petrus de Milliano"</span>,
   <span class="cm-string cm-property">"mother"</span>: <span class="cm-string">"Sophia van Damme"</span>},
  {<span class="cm-string cm-property">"name"</span>: <span class="cm-string">"Carolus Haverbeke"</span>, <span class="cm-string cm-property">"sex"</span>: <span class="cm-string">"m"</span>,
   <span class="cm-string cm-property">"born"</span>: <span class="cm-number">1832</span>, <span class="cm-string cm-property">"died"</span>: <span class="cm-number">1905</span>,
   <span class="cm-string cm-property">"father"</span>: <span class="cm-string">"Carel Haverbeke"</span>,
   <span class="cm-string cm-property">"mother"</span>: <span class="cm-string">"Maria van Brussel"</span>},
  <span class="cm-variable">…</span> <span class="cm-variable">and</span> <span class="cm-variable">so</span> <span class="cm-variable">on</span>
]</pre>
<p>This format is called JSON (pronounced “Jason”),
which stands for JavaScript Object Notation. It is widely used as a
data storage and communication format on the Web.</p>
<p>JSON is similar to
JavaScript&#8217;s way of writing arrays and objects, with a few
restrictions. All property names have to be surrounded by double quotes, and
only simple data expressions are allowed—no function calls,
variables, or anything that involves actual computation. Comments are not
allowed in JSON.</p>
<p>JavaScript
gives us functions, <code>JSON.stringify</code> and <code>JSON.parse</code>, that convert
data to and from this format. The first takes a JavaScript value and
returns a JSON-encoded string. The second takes such a string and
converts it to the value it encodes.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">string</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">JSON</span>.<span class="cm-property">stringify</span>({<span class="cm-property">name</span>: <span class="cm-string">"X"</span>, <span class="cm-property">born</span>: <span class="cm-number">1980</span>});
<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">string</span>);
<span class="cm-comment">// → {"name":"X","born":1980}</span>
<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">JSON</span>.<span class="cm-property">parse</span>(<span class="cm-variable">string</span>).<span class="cm-property">born</span>);
<span class="cm-comment">// → 1980</span></pre>
<p>The variable <code>ANCESTRY_FILE</code>, available in
the sandbox for this chapter and in
<a href="http://eloquentjavascript.net/code/ancestry.js">a downloadable file</a> on
the website(<a href="http://eloquentjavascript.net/code#5"><em>eloquentjavascript.net/code#5</em></a>), contains the
content of my JSON file as a string. Let&#8217;s decode it and see how
many people it contains.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">ancestry</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">JSON</span>.<span class="cm-property">parse</span>(<span class="cm-variable">ANCESTRY_FILE</span>);
<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">ancestry</span>.<span class="cm-property">length</span>);
<span class="cm-comment">// → 39</span></pre>
<h2>Filtering an array</h2>
<p>To find
the people in the ancestry data set who were young in 1924, the
following function might be helpful. It filters out the elements in an
array that don&#8217;t pass a test.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">filter</span>(<span class="cm-def">array</span>, <span class="cm-def">test</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">passed</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> [];
  <span class="cm-keyword">for</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">i</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-number">0</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">i</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">array</span>.<span class="cm-property">length</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">i</span><span class="cm-operator">++</span>) {
    <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">test</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">array</span>[<span class="cm-variable-2">i</span>]))
      <span class="cm-variable-2">passed</span>.<span class="cm-property">push</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">array</span>[<span class="cm-variable-2">i</span>]);
  }
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">passed</span>;
}

<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">filter</span>(<span class="cm-variable">ancestry</span>, <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">person</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">person</span>.<span class="cm-property">born</span> <span class="cm-operator">></span> <span class="cm-number">1900</span> <span class="cm-operator">&amp;&amp;</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">person</span>.<span class="cm-property">born</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-number">1925</span>;
}));
<span class="cm-comment">// → [{name: "Philibert Haverbeke", …}, …]</span></pre>
<p>This uses the
argument named <code>test</code>, a function value, to fill in a “gap” in the
computation. The <code>test</code> function is called for each element, and its
return value determines whether an element is included in the returned
array.</p>
<p>Three people in the file were alive and young in
1924: my grandfather, grandmother, and great-aunt.</p>
<p>Note how the
<code>filter</code> function, rather than deleting elements from the existing
array, builds up a new array with only the elements that pass the
test. This function is <em>pure</em>. It does not modify the array it is
given.</p>
<p>Like <code>forEach</code>, <code>filter</code> is also a standard method on arrays. The
example defined the function only in order to show what it does
internally. From now on, we&#8217;ll use it like this instead:</p>
<pre><span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">ancestry</span>.<span class="cm-property">filter</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">person</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">person</span>.<span class="cm-property">father</span> <span class="cm-operator">==</span> <span class="cm-string">"Carel Haverbeke"</span>;
}));
<span class="cm-comment">// → [{name: "Carolus Haverbeke", …}]</span></pre>
<h2>Transforming with map</h2>
<p>Say we
have an array of objects representing people, produced by filtering
the <code>ancestry</code> array somehow. But we want an array of names, which is
easier to read.</p>
<p>The <code>map</code> method transforms an array by
applying a function to all of its elements and building a new array
from the returned values. The new array will have the same length as
the input array, but its content will have been “mapped” to a new form
by the function.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">map</span>(<span class="cm-def">array</span>, <span class="cm-def">transform</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">mapped</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> [];
  <span class="cm-keyword">for</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">i</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-number">0</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">i</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">array</span>.<span class="cm-property">length</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">i</span><span class="cm-operator">++</span>)
    <span class="cm-variable-2">mapped</span>.<span class="cm-property">push</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">transform</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">array</span>[<span class="cm-variable-2">i</span>]));
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">mapped</span>;
}

<span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">overNinety</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">ancestry</span>.<span class="cm-property">filter</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">person</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">person</span>.<span class="cm-property">died</span> <span class="cm-operator">-</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">person</span>.<span class="cm-property">born</span> <span class="cm-operator">></span> <span class="cm-number">90</span>;
});
<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">map</span>(<span class="cm-variable">overNinety</span>, <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">person</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">person</span>.<span class="cm-property">name</span>;
}));
<span class="cm-comment">// → ["Clara Aernoudts", "Emile Haverbeke",</span>
<span class="cm-comment">//    "Maria Haverbeke"]</span></pre>
<p>Interestingly, the people who lived to at least 90 years of age are the
same three people who we saw before—the people who were young in the
1920s, which happens to be the most recent generation in my data set.
I guess medicine has come a long way.</p>
<p>Like <code>forEach</code> and <code>filter</code>, <code>map</code> is also a standard method on
arrays.</p>
<h2>Summarizing with reduce</h2>
<p>Another common pattern of computation on arrays is computing
a single value from them. Our recurring example, summing a collection
of numbers, is an instance of this. Another example would be finding
the person with the earliest year of birth in the data set.</p>
<p>The higher-order
operation that represents this pattern is called <em>reduce</em> (or
sometimes <em>fold</em>). You can think of it as folding up the array, one
element at a time. When summing numbers, you&#8217;d start with the number
zero and, for each element, combine it with the current sum by adding
the two.</p>
<p>The parameters to the <code>reduce</code> function are, apart from the array, a
combining function and a start value. This function is a little less
straightforward than <code>filter</code> and <code>map</code>, so pay close attention.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">reduce</span>(<span class="cm-def">array</span>, <span class="cm-def">combine</span>, <span class="cm-def">start</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">current</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">start</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">for</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">i</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-number">0</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">i</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">array</span>.<span class="cm-property">length</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">i</span><span class="cm-operator">++</span>)
    <span class="cm-variable-2">current</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">combine</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">current</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">array</span>[<span class="cm-variable-2">i</span>]);
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">current</span>;
}

<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">reduce</span>([<span class="cm-number">1</span>, <span class="cm-number">2</span>, <span class="cm-number">3</span>, <span class="cm-number">4</span>], <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">a</span>, <span class="cm-def">b</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">a</span> <span class="cm-operator">+</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">b</span>;
}, <span class="cm-number">0</span>));
<span class="cm-comment">// → 10</span></pre>
<p>The standard array method <code>reduce</code>, which of course
corresponds to this function, has an added convenience. If your array
contains at least one element, you are allowed to leave off the
<code>start</code> argument. The method will take the first element of the array
as its start value and start reducing at the second element.</p>
<p>To use <code>reduce</code> to find my most
ancient known ancestor, we can write something like this:</p>
<pre><span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">ancestry</span>.<span class="cm-property">reduce</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">min</span>, <span class="cm-def">cur</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">cur</span>.<span class="cm-property">born</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">min</span>.<span class="cm-property">born</span>) <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">cur</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">else</span> <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">min</span>;
}));
<span class="cm-comment">// → {name: "Pauwels van Haverbeke", born: 1535, …}</span></pre>
<h2>Composability</h2>
<p>Consider how we would
have written the previous example (finding the person with the
earliest year of birth) without higher-order functions. The code is
not that much worse.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">min</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">ancestry</span>[<span class="cm-number">0</span>];
<span class="cm-keyword">for</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">i</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-number">1</span>; <span class="cm-variable">i</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-variable">ancestry</span>.<span class="cm-property">length</span>; <span class="cm-variable">i</span><span class="cm-operator">++</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">cur</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">ancestry</span>[<span class="cm-variable">i</span>];
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable">cur</span>.<span class="cm-property">born</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-variable">min</span>.<span class="cm-property">born</span>)
    <span class="cm-variable">min</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">cur</span>;
}
<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">min</span>);
<span class="cm-comment">// → {name: "Pauwels van Haverbeke", born: 1535, …}</span></pre>
<p>There are a few more variables, and the program is two lines
longer but still quite easy to understand.</p>
<p id="average_function">Higher-order
functions start to shine when you need to <em>compose</em> functions. As an
example, let&#8217;s write code that finds the average age for men and for
women in the data set.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">average</span>(<span class="cm-def">array</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-def">plus</span>(<span class="cm-def">a</span>, <span class="cm-def">b</span>) { <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">a</span> <span class="cm-operator">+</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">b</span>; }
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">array</span>.<span class="cm-property">reduce</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">plus</span>) <span class="cm-operator">/</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">array</span>.<span class="cm-property">length</span>;
}
<span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">age</span>(<span class="cm-def">p</span>) { <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">p</span>.<span class="cm-property">died</span> <span class="cm-operator">-</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">p</span>.<span class="cm-property">born</span>; }
<span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">male</span>(<span class="cm-def">p</span>) { <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">p</span>.<span class="cm-property">sex</span> <span class="cm-operator">==</span> <span class="cm-string">"m"</span>; }
<span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">female</span>(<span class="cm-def">p</span>) { <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">p</span>.<span class="cm-property">sex</span> <span class="cm-operator">==</span> <span class="cm-string">"f"</span>; }

<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">average</span>(<span class="cm-variable">ancestry</span>.<span class="cm-property">filter</span>(<span class="cm-variable">male</span>).<span class="cm-property">map</span>(<span class="cm-variable">age</span>)));
<span class="cm-comment">// → 61.67</span>
<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">average</span>(<span class="cm-variable">ancestry</span>.<span class="cm-property">filter</span>(<span class="cm-variable">female</span>).<span class="cm-property">map</span>(<span class="cm-variable">age</span>)));
<span class="cm-comment">// → 54.56</span></pre>
<p>(It&#8217;s a bit
silly that we have to define <code>plus</code> as a function, but operators in
JavaScript, unlike functions, are not values, so you can&#8217;t pass them
as arguments.)</p>
<p>Instead of tangling the logic into a
big loop, it is neatly composed into the concepts we are
interested in—determining sex, computing age, and averaging numbers. We
can apply these one by one to get the result we are looking for.</p>
<p>This is <em>fabulous</em> for writing clear code. Unfortunately, this clarity
comes at a cost.</p>
<h2>The cost</h2>
<p>In the happy land of elegant code
and pretty rainbows, there lives a spoil-sport monster called
<em>inefficiency</em>.</p>
<p>A program that processes an array is most
elegantly expressed as a sequence of cleanly separated steps that each
do something with the array and produce a new array. But building up
all those intermediate arrays is somewhat expensive.</p>
<p>Likewise, passing a function to
<code>forEach</code> and letting that method handle the array iteration for us is
convenient and easy to read. But function calls in JavaScript are
costly compared to simple loop bodies.</p>
<p>And so it goes with a lot of techniques that help
improve the clarity of a program. Abstractions add layers between the
raw things the computer is doing and the concepts we are working with
and thus cause the machine to perform more work. This is not an iron
law—there are programming languages that have better support for
building abstractions without adding inefficiencies, and even in
JavaScript, an experienced programmer can find ways to write abstract
code that is still fast. But it is a problem that comes up a lot.</p>
<p>Fortunately, most computers are insanely fast. If you
are processing a modest set of data or doing something that has
to happen only on a human time scale (say, every time the user clicks a
button), then it <em>does not matter</em> whether you wrote a pretty solution
that takes half a millisecond or a super-optimized solution that takes
a tenth of a millisecond.</p>
<p>It is helpful to
roughly keep track of how often a piece of your program is going to
run. If you have a loop inside a loop (either directly or through
the outer loop calling a function that ends up performing the inner
loop), the code inside the inner loop will end up running <em>N</em>×<em>M</em>
times, where <em>N</em> is the number of times the outer loop repeats and
<em>M</em> is the number of times the inner loop repeats within each iteration
of the outer loop. If that inner loop contains another loop that makes
<em>P</em> rounds, its body will run <em>M</em>×<em>N</em>×<em>P</em> times, and so on. This
can add up to large numbers, and when a program is slow, the problem
can often be traced to only a small part of the code, which sits inside an inner loop.</p>
<h2>Great-great-great-great-...</h2>
<p>My grandfather, Philibert Haverbeke, is
included in the data file. By starting with him, I can trace my
lineage to find out whether the most ancient person in the data,
Pauwels van Haverbeke, is my direct ancestor. And if he is, I would
like to know how much DNA I theoretically share with him.</p>
<p>To be able to go from a parent&#8217;s name to the actual object that
represents this person, we first build up an object that associates
names with people.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">byName</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> {};
<span class="cm-variable">ancestry</span>.<span class="cm-property">forEach</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">person</span>) {
  <span class="cm-variable">byName</span>[<span class="cm-variable-2">person</span>.<span class="cm-property">name</span>] <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">person</span>;
});

<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">byName</span>[<span class="cm-string">"Philibert Haverbeke"</span>]);
<span class="cm-comment">// → {name: "Philibert Haverbeke", …}</span></pre>
<p>Now, the problem is not entirely as simple as following the <code>father</code>
properties and counting how many we need to reach Pauwels. There are
several cases in the family tree where people married their second
cousins (tiny villages and all that). This causes the branches of the
family tree to rejoin in a few places, which means I share more than
1/2<sup><em>G</em></sup> of my genes with this person, where <em>G</em> for the number of
generations between Pauwels and me. This formula comes from the idea
that each generation splits the gene pool in two.</p>
<p>A reasonable way to think about
this problem is to look at it as being analogous to <code>reduce</code>, which
condenses an array to a single value by repeatedly combining
values, left to right. In this case, we also want to condense our data
structure to a single value but in a way that follows family
lines. The <em>shape</em> of the data is that of a family tree, rather than a
flat list.</p>
<p>The way we want to reduce this shape is by computing a value for a
given person by combining values from their ancestors. This can be
done recursively: if we are interested in person <em>A</em>, we have to
compute the values for <em>A</em>’s parents, which in turn requires us to
compute the value for <em>A</em>’s grandparents, and so on. In principle,
that&#8217;d require us to look at an infinite number of people, but since
our data set is finite, we have to stop somewhere. We&#8217;ll allow a
default value to be given to our reduction function, which will be
used for people who are not in the data. In our case, that value is
simply zero, on the assumption that people not in the list don&#8217;t share
DNA with the ancestor we are looking at.</p>
<p>Given a person, a
function to combine values from the two parents of a given person, and
a default value, <code>reduceAncestors</code> condenses a value from a family
tree.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">reduceAncestors</span>(<span class="cm-def">person</span>, <span class="cm-def">f</span>, <span class="cm-def">defaultValue</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-def">valueFor</span>(<span class="cm-def">person</span>) {
    <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">person</span> <span class="cm-operator">==</span> <span class="cm-atom">null</span>)
      <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">defaultValue</span>;
    <span class="cm-keyword">else</span>
      <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">f</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">person</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">valueFor</span>(<span class="cm-variable">byName</span>[<span class="cm-variable-2">person</span>.<span class="cm-property">mother</span>]),
                       <span class="cm-variable-2">valueFor</span>(<span class="cm-variable">byName</span>[<span class="cm-variable-2">person</span>.<span class="cm-property">father</span>]));
  }
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">valueFor</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">person</span>);
}</pre>
<p>The inner function (<code>valueFor</code>) handles a
single person. Through the magic of recursion, it can simply call
itself to handle the father and the mother of this person. The
results, along with the person object itself, are passed to <code>f</code>, which
returns the actual value for this person.</p>
<p>We can then use this to compute the amount of DNA my
grandfather shared with Pauwels van Haverbeke and divide that by
four.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">sharedDNA</span>(<span class="cm-def">person</span>, <span class="cm-def">fromMother</span>, <span class="cm-def">fromFather</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">person</span>.<span class="cm-property">name</span> <span class="cm-operator">==</span> <span class="cm-string">"Pauwels van Haverbeke"</span>)
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-number">1</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">else</span>
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">fromMother</span> <span class="cm-operator">+</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">fromFather</span>) <span class="cm-operator">/</span> <span class="cm-number">2</span>;
}
<span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">ph</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">byName</span>[<span class="cm-string">"Philibert Haverbeke"</span>];
<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">reduceAncestors</span>(<span class="cm-variable">ph</span>, <span class="cm-variable">sharedDNA</span>, <span class="cm-number">0</span>) <span class="cm-operator">/</span> <span class="cm-number">4</span>);
<span class="cm-comment">// → 0.00049</span></pre>
<p>The person with the name Pauwels van Haverbeke obviously shared 100 percent
of his DNA with Pauwels van Haverbeke (there are no people who share
names in the data set), so the function returns 1 for him. All other
people share the average of the amounts that their parents share.</p>
<p>So, statistically speaking, I share about 0.05 percent of my DNA with
this 16th-century person. It should be noted that this is only a
statistical approximation, not an exact amount. It is a rather small
number, but given how much genetic material we carry (about 3 billion
base pairs), there&#8217;s still probably some aspect in the biological
machine that is me that originates with Pauwels.</p>
<p>We could also have computed this number
without relying on <code>reduceAncestors</code>. But separating the general
approach (condensing a family tree) from the specific case (computing
shared DNA) can improve the clarity of the code and allows us to reuse
the abstract part of the program for other cases. For example, the
following code finds the percentage of a person&#8217;s known ancestors who
lived past 70 (by lineage, so people may be counted multiple times):</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">countAncestors</span>(<span class="cm-def">person</span>, <span class="cm-def">test</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-def">combine</span>(<span class="cm-def">current</span>, <span class="cm-def">fromMother</span>, <span class="cm-def">fromFather</span>) {
    <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">thisOneCounts</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">current</span> <span class="cm-operator">!=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">person</span> <span class="cm-operator">&amp;&amp;</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">test</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">current</span>);
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">fromMother</span> <span class="cm-operator">+</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">fromFather</span> <span class="cm-operator">+</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">thisOneCounts</span> <span class="cm-operator">?</span> <span class="cm-number">1</span> : <span class="cm-number">0</span>);
  }
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable">reduceAncestors</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">person</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">combine</span>, <span class="cm-number">0</span>);
}
<span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">longLivingPercentage</span>(<span class="cm-def">person</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">all</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">countAncestors</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">person</span>, <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">person</span>) {
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-atom">true</span>;
  });
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">longLiving</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">countAncestors</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">person</span>, <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">person</span>) {
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">person</span>.<span class="cm-property">died</span> <span class="cm-operator">-</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">person</span>.<span class="cm-property">born</span>) <span class="cm-operator">>=</span> <span class="cm-number">70</span>;
  });
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">longLiving</span> <span class="cm-operator">/</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">all</span>;
}
<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">longLivingPercentage</span>(<span class="cm-variable">byName</span>[<span class="cm-string">"Emile Haverbeke"</span>]));
<span class="cm-comment">// → 0.129</span></pre>
<p>Such numbers are not to be taken too seriously, given that
our data set contains a rather arbitrary collection of people. But the
code illustrates the fact that <code>reduceAncestors</code> gives us a useful
piece of vocabulary for working with the family tree data
structure.</p>
<h2>Binding</h2>
<p>The <code>bind</code> method, which all
functions have, creates a new function that will call the original
function but with some of the arguments already fixed.</p>
<p>The following code shows an
example of <code>bind</code> in use. It defines a function <code>isInSet</code> that
tells us whether a person is in a given set of strings. To call
<code>filter</code> in order to collect those person objects whose names are in a
specific set, we can either write a function expression that makes a
call to <code>isInSet</code> with our set as its first argument or <em>partially
apply</em> the <code>isInSet</code> function.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">theSet</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> [<span class="cm-string">"Carel Haverbeke"</span>, <span class="cm-string">"Maria van Brussel"</span>,
              <span class="cm-string">"Donald Duck"</span>];
<span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">isInSet</span>(<span class="cm-def">set</span>, <span class="cm-def">person</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">set</span>.<span class="cm-property">indexOf</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">person</span>.<span class="cm-property">name</span>) <span class="cm-operator">></span> <span class="cm-operator">-</span><span class="cm-number">1</span>;
}

<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">ancestry</span>.<span class="cm-property">filter</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">person</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable">isInSet</span>(<span class="cm-variable">theSet</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">person</span>);
}));
<span class="cm-comment">// → [{name: "Maria van Brussel", …},</span>
<span class="cm-comment">//    {name: "Carel Haverbeke", …}]</span>
<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">ancestry</span>.<span class="cm-property">filter</span>(<span class="cm-variable">isInSet</span>.<span class="cm-property">bind</span>(<span class="cm-atom">null</span>, <span class="cm-variable">theSet</span>)));
<span class="cm-comment">// → … same result</span></pre>
<p>The call to <code>bind</code> returns a function that will call <code>isInSet</code> with
<code>theSet</code> as first argument, followed by any remaining arguments given
to the bound function.</p>
<p>The first argument, where the example passes <code>null</code>, is used
for method calls, similar to the first argument to <code>apply</code>. I&#8217;ll
describe this in more detail in the
<a href="06_object.xhtml#call_method">next chapter</a>.</p>
<h2>Summary</h2>
<p>Being able to pass function values to other functions is not just a
gimmick but a deeply useful aspect of JavaScript. It allows us to
write computations with “gaps” in them as functions and have the code
that calls these functions fill in those gaps by providing function
values that describe the missing computations.</p>
<p>Arrays provide a number of useful higher-order methods—<code>forEach</code>
to do something with each element in an array, <code>filter</code> to build a new
array with some elements filtered out, <code>map</code> to build a new array
where each element has been put through a function, and <code>reduce</code> to
combine all an array&#8217;s elements into a single value.</p>
<p>Functions have an <code>apply</code> method that can be used to call them with an
array specifying their arguments. They also have a <code>bind</code> method,
which is used to create a partially applied version of the function.</p>
<h2>Exercises</h2>
<h3>Flattening</h3>
<p>Use the <code>reduce</code> method in combination with
the <code>concat</code> method to “flatten” an array of arrays into a single
array that has all the elements of the input arrays.</p>
<h3>Mother-child age difference</h3>
<p>Using the example data set from this chapter, compute the
average age difference between mothers and children (the age of the
mother when the child is born). You can use the <code>average</code> function
defined <a href="05_higher_order.xhtml#average_function">earlier</a> in this
chapter.</p>
<p>Note that not all the mothers mentioned in the data
are themselves present in the array. The <code>byName</code> object, which makes
it easy to find a person&#8217;s object from their name, might be useful
here.</p>
<h3>Historical life expectancy</h3>
<p>When we looked up all the people in
our data set that lived more than 90 years, only the latest
generation in the data came out. Let&#8217;s take a closer look at that
phenomenon.</p>
<p>Compute and output the average age of the people
in the ancestry data set per century. A person is assigned to a
century by taking their year of death, dividing it by 100,
and rounding it up, as in <code>Math.ceil(person.died / 100)</code>.</p>
<p>For
bonus points, write a function <code>groupBy</code> that abstracts the grouping
operation. It should accept as arguments an array and a function that
computes the group for an element in the array and returns an object
that maps group names to arrays of group members.</p>
<h3>Every and then some</h3>
<p>Arrays also come with the standard methods <code>every</code> and
<code>some</code>. Both take a predicate function that, when called with an array
element as argument, returns true or false. Just like <code>&amp;&amp;</code>
returns a true value only when the expressions on both sides are true,
<code>every</code> returns true only when the predicate returns true for <em>all</em>
elements of the array. Similarly, <code>some</code> returns true as soon as the
predicate returns true for <em>any</em> of the elements. They do not process
more elements than necessary—for example, if <code>some</code> finds that the
predicate holds for the first element of the array, it will not look
at the values after that.</p>
<p>Write two functions, <code>every</code> and <code>some</code>, that behave like these
methods, except that they take the array as their first argument
rather than being a method.</p>
    </article>
  </body>
</html>
