<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <title>Project: Electronic Life</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <article>

<h1 id="elife"><span class="chap_num">Chapter 7</span>Project: Electronic Life</h1>
<blockquote>
<p>[...] the question of whether Machines Can Think [...] is about as
relevant as the question of whether Submarines Can Swim.</p>
 <footer>Edsger Dijkstra, <cite>The Threats to Computing Science</cite></footer>
</blockquote>
<p>In “project” chapters,
I&#8217;ll stop pummeling you with new theory for a brief moment and
instead work through a program with you. Theory is indispensable when
learning to program, but it should be accompanied by reading and
understanding nontrivial programs.</p>
<p>Our
project in this chapter is to build a virtual ecosystem, a little
world populated with critters that move around and struggle for
survival.</p>
<h2>Definition</h2>
<p>To make this
task manageable, we will radically simplify the concept of a
<em>world</em>. Namely, a world will be a two-dimensional grid where
each entity takes up one full square of the grid. On every <em>turn</em>,
the critters all get a chance to take some action.</p>
<p>Thus, we chop both time and space
into units with a fixed size: squares for space and turns for time. Of
course, this is a somewhat crude and inaccurate approximation. But
our simulation is intended to be amusing, not accurate, so we can
freely cut such corners.</p>
<p id="plan">We can define a world with a <em>plan</em>, an array of
strings that lays out the world&#8217;s grid using one character per square.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">plan</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> [<span class="cm-string">"############################"</span>,
            <span class="cm-string">"#      #    #      o      ##"</span>,
            <span class="cm-string">"#                          #"</span>,
            <span class="cm-string">"#          #####           #"</span>,
            <span class="cm-string">"##         #   #    ##     #"</span>,
            <span class="cm-string">"###           ##     #     #"</span>,
            <span class="cm-string">"#           ###      #     #"</span>,
            <span class="cm-string">"#   ####                   #"</span>,
            <span class="cm-string">"#   ##       o             #"</span>,
            <span class="cm-string">"# o  #         o       ### #"</span>,
            <span class="cm-string">"#    #                     #"</span>,
            <span class="cm-string">"############################"</span>];</pre>
<p>The “#” characters in this plan represent walls and rocks, and the
“o” characters represent critters. The spaces, as you might have
guessed, are empty space.</p>
<p>A plan array can be
used to create a world object. Such an object keeps track of the
size and content of the world. It has a <code>toString</code> method, which
converts the world back to a printable string (similar to the plan it
was based on) so that we can see what&#8217;s going on inside. The world
object also has a <code>turn</code> method, which allows all the critters in it to
take one turn and updates the world to reflect their actions.</p>
<h2 id="grid">Representing space</h2>
<p>The grid
that models the world has a fixed width and height. Squares are
identified by their x- and y-coordinates. We use a simple type,
<code>Vector</code> (as seen in the exercises for the
<a href="06_object.xhtml#exercise_vector">previous chapter</a>), to represent
these coordinate pairs.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">Vector</span>(<span class="cm-def">x</span>, <span class="cm-def">y</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">x</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">x</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">y</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">y</span>;
}
<span class="cm-variable">Vector</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span>.<span class="cm-property">plus</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">other</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Vector</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">x</span> <span class="cm-operator">+</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">other</span>.<span class="cm-property">x</span>, <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">y</span> <span class="cm-operator">+</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">other</span>.<span class="cm-property">y</span>);
};</pre>
<p>Next, we need an object type that
models the grid itself. A grid is part of a world, but we are making
it a separate object (which will be a property of a world object)
to keep the world object itself simple. The world should concern
itself with world-related things, and the grid should concern itself with grid-related things.</p>
<p>To store a grid of values, we have
several options. We can use an array of row arrays and use two
property accesses to get to a specific square, like this:</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">grid</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> [[<span class="cm-string">"top left"</span>,    <span class="cm-string">"top middle"</span>,    <span class="cm-string">"top right"</span>],
            [<span class="cm-string">"bottom left"</span>, <span class="cm-string">"bottom middle"</span>, <span class="cm-string">"bottom right"</span>]];
<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">grid</span>[<span class="cm-number">1</span>][<span class="cm-number">2</span>]);
<span class="cm-comment">// → bottom right</span></pre>
<p>Or we can use a
single array, with size width × height, and decide that the element at
(<em>x</em>,<em>y</em>) is found at position <em>x</em> + (<em>y</em> × width) in the array.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">grid</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> [<span class="cm-string">"top left"</span>,    <span class="cm-string">"top middle"</span>,    <span class="cm-string">"top right"</span>,
            <span class="cm-string">"bottom left"</span>, <span class="cm-string">"bottom middle"</span>, <span class="cm-string">"bottom right"</span>];
<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">grid</span>[<span class="cm-number">2</span> <span class="cm-operator">+</span> (<span class="cm-number">1</span> <span class="cm-operator">*</span> <span class="cm-number">3</span>)]);
<span class="cm-comment">// → bottom right</span></pre>
<p>Since the actual access to this array will be wrapped in methods
on the grid object type, it doesn&#8217;t matter to outside code which
approach we take. I chose the second representation because it makes
it much easier to create the array. When calling the <code>Array</code>
constructor with a single number as an argument, it creates a new empty
array of the given length.</p>
<p>This code defines the <code>Grid</code> object, with some basic
methods:</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">Grid</span>(<span class="cm-def">width</span>, <span class="cm-def">height</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">space</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Array</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">width</span> <span class="cm-operator">*</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">height</span>);
  <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">width</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">width</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">height</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">height</span>;
}
<span class="cm-variable">Grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span>.<span class="cm-property">isInside</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">vector</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">vector</span>.<span class="cm-property">x</span> <span class="cm-operator">>=</span> <span class="cm-number">0</span> <span class="cm-operator">&amp;&amp;</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">vector</span>.<span class="cm-property">x</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">width</span> <span class="cm-operator">&amp;&amp;</span>
         <span class="cm-variable-2">vector</span>.<span class="cm-property">y</span> <span class="cm-operator">>=</span> <span class="cm-number">0</span> <span class="cm-operator">&amp;&amp;</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">vector</span>.<span class="cm-property">y</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">height</span>;
};
<span class="cm-variable">Grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span>.<span class="cm-property">get</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">vector</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">space</span>[<span class="cm-variable-2">vector</span>.<span class="cm-property">x</span> <span class="cm-operator">+</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">width</span> <span class="cm-operator">*</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">vector</span>.<span class="cm-property">y</span>];
};
<span class="cm-variable">Grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span>.<span class="cm-property">set</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">vector</span>, <span class="cm-def">value</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">space</span>[<span class="cm-variable-2">vector</span>.<span class="cm-property">x</span> <span class="cm-operator">+</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">width</span> <span class="cm-operator">*</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">vector</span>.<span class="cm-property">y</span>] <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">value</span>;
};</pre>
<p>And here is a trivial test:</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">grid</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Grid</span>(<span class="cm-number">5</span>, <span class="cm-number">5</span>);
<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">get</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Vector</span>(<span class="cm-number">1</span>, <span class="cm-number">1</span>)));
<span class="cm-comment">// → undefined</span>
<span class="cm-variable">grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">set</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Vector</span>(<span class="cm-number">1</span>, <span class="cm-number">1</span>), <span class="cm-string">"X"</span>);
<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">get</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Vector</span>(<span class="cm-number">1</span>, <span class="cm-number">1</span>)));
<span class="cm-comment">// → X</span></pre>
<h2>A critter&#8217;s programming interface</h2>
<p>Before we can
start on the <code>World</code> constructor, we must get more specific about
the critter objects that will be living inside it. I mentioned
that the world will ask the critters what actions they want to take.
This works as follows: each critter object has an <code>act</code> method
that, when called, returns an <em>action</em>. An action is an object with a
<code>type</code> property, which names the type of action the critter wants to
take, for example <code>"move"</code>. The action may also contain extra
information, such as the direction the critter wants to move in.</p>
<p id="directions">Critters are terribly myopic and can see only the
squares directly around them on the grid. But even this limited vision
can be useful when deciding which action to take. When the <code>act</code>
method is called, it is given a <em>view</em> object that allows the critter
to inspect its surroundings. We name the eight surrounding squares by
their compass directions: <code>"n"</code> for north, <code>"ne"</code> for northeast,
and so on. Here&#8217;s the object we will use to map from direction names
to coordinate offsets:</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">directions</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> {
  <span class="cm-string cm-property">"n"</span>:  <span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Vector</span>( <span class="cm-number">0</span>, <span class="cm-operator">-</span><span class="cm-number">1</span>),
  <span class="cm-string cm-property">"ne"</span>: <span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Vector</span>( <span class="cm-number">1</span>, <span class="cm-operator">-</span><span class="cm-number">1</span>),
  <span class="cm-string cm-property">"e"</span>:  <span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Vector</span>( <span class="cm-number">1</span>,  <span class="cm-number">0</span>),
  <span class="cm-string cm-property">"se"</span>: <span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Vector</span>( <span class="cm-number">1</span>,  <span class="cm-number">1</span>),
  <span class="cm-string cm-property">"s"</span>:  <span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Vector</span>( <span class="cm-number">0</span>,  <span class="cm-number">1</span>),
  <span class="cm-string cm-property">"sw"</span>: <span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Vector</span>(<span class="cm-operator">-</span><span class="cm-number">1</span>,  <span class="cm-number">1</span>),
  <span class="cm-string cm-property">"w"</span>:  <span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Vector</span>(<span class="cm-operator">-</span><span class="cm-number">1</span>,  <span class="cm-number">0</span>),
  <span class="cm-string cm-property">"nw"</span>: <span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Vector</span>(<span class="cm-operator">-</span><span class="cm-number">1</span>, <span class="cm-operator">-</span><span class="cm-number">1</span>)
};</pre>
<p>The view object has a method <code>look</code>, which takes a
direction and returns a character, for example <code>"#"</code> when there is a
wall in that direction, or <code>" "</code> (space) when there is nothing there.
The object also provides the convenient methods <code>find</code> and <code>findAll</code>.
Both take a map character as an argument. The first returns a direction
in which the character can be found next to the critter or returns <code>null</code> if
no such direction exists. The second returns an array containing all
directions with that character. For example, a creature sitting left
(west) of a wall will get <code>["ne", "e", "se"]</code> when calling <code>findAll</code>
on its view object with the <code>"#"</code> character as argument.</p>
<p>Here is a
simple, stupid critter that just follows its nose until it hits an
obstacle and then bounces off in a random open direction:</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">randomElement</span>(<span class="cm-def">array</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">array</span>[<span class="cm-variable">Math</span>.<span class="cm-property">floor</span>(<span class="cm-variable">Math</span>.<span class="cm-property">random</span>() <span class="cm-operator">*</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">array</span>.<span class="cm-property">length</span>)];
}

<span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">directionNames</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-string">"n ne e se s sw w nw"</span>.<span class="cm-property">split</span>(<span class="cm-string">" "</span>);

<span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">BouncingCritter</span>() {
  <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">direction</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">randomElement</span>(<span class="cm-variable">directionNames</span>);
};

<span class="cm-variable">BouncingCritter</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span>.<span class="cm-property">act</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">view</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">view</span>.<span class="cm-property">look</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">direction</span>) <span class="cm-operator">!=</span> <span class="cm-string">" "</span>)
    <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">direction</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">view</span>.<span class="cm-property">find</span>(<span class="cm-string">" "</span>) <span class="cm-operator">||</span> <span class="cm-string">"s"</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> {<span class="cm-property">type</span>: <span class="cm-string">"move"</span>, <span class="cm-property">direction</span>: <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">direction</span>};
};</pre>
<p>The <code>randomElement</code> helper
function simply picks a random element from an array, using
<code>Math.random</code> plus some arithmetic to get a random index. We&#8217;ll use
this again later because randomness can be useful in simulations.</p>
<p>To pick a random direction, the
<code>BouncingCritter</code> constructor calls <code>randomElement</code> on an array of
direction names. We could also have used <code>Object.keys</code> to get this
array from the <code>directions</code> object we defined
<a href="07_elife.xhtml#directions">earlier</a>, but that provides no
guarantees about the order in which the properties are listed. In most
situations, modern JavaScript engines will return properties in the
order they were defined, but they are not required to.</p>
<p>The “<code>|| "s"</code>” in the <code>act</code> method is
there to prevent <code>this.direction</code> from getting the value <code>null</code> if the
critter is somehow trapped with no empty space around it (for example
when crowded into a corner by other critters).</p>
<h2>The world object</h2>
<p>Now we can start on the
<code>World</code> object type. The constructor takes a plan (the array of
strings representing the world&#8217;s grid, described
<a href="07_elife.xhtml#grid">earlier</a>) and a <em>legend</em> as arguments. A
legend is an object that tells us what each character in the map
means. It contains a constructor for every character—except for the
space character, which always refers to <code>null</code>, the value we&#8217;ll use to
represent empty space.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">elementFromChar</span>(<span class="cm-def">legend</span>, <span class="cm-def">ch</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">ch</span> <span class="cm-operator">==</span> <span class="cm-string">" "</span>)
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-atom">null</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">element</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">legend</span>[<span class="cm-variable-2">ch</span>]();
  <span class="cm-variable-2">element</span>.<span class="cm-property">originChar</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">ch</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">element</span>;
}

<span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">World</span>(<span class="cm-def">map</span>, <span class="cm-def">legend</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">grid</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Grid</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">map</span>[<span class="cm-number">0</span>].<span class="cm-property">length</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">map</span>.<span class="cm-property">length</span>);
  <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">grid</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">grid</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">legend</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">legend</span>;

  <span class="cm-variable-2">map</span>.<span class="cm-property">forEach</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">line</span>, <span class="cm-def">y</span>) {
    <span class="cm-keyword">for</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">x</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-number">0</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">x</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">line</span>.<span class="cm-property">length</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">x</span><span class="cm-operator">++</span>)
      <span class="cm-variable-2">grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">set</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Vector</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">x</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">y</span>),
               <span class="cm-variable">elementFromChar</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">legend</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">line</span>[<span class="cm-variable-2">x</span>]));
  });
}</pre>
<p>In <code>elementFromChar</code>,
first we create an instance of the right type by looking up the
character&#8217;s constructor and applying <code>new</code> to it. Then we add an
<code>originChar</code> property to it to make it easy to find out what
character the element was originally created from.</p>
<p>We need this <code>originChar</code> property when
implementing the world&#8217;s <code>toString</code> method. This method builds up a
maplike string from the world&#8217;s current state by performing a
two-dimensional loop over the squares on the grid.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">charFromElement</span>(<span class="cm-def">element</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">element</span> <span class="cm-operator">==</span> <span class="cm-atom">null</span>)
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-string">" "</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">else</span>
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">element</span>.<span class="cm-property">originChar</span>;
}

<span class="cm-variable">World</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span>.<span class="cm-property">toString</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>() {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">output</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-string">""</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">for</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">y</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-number">0</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">y</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">height</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">y</span><span class="cm-operator">++</span>) {
    <span class="cm-keyword">for</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">x</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-number">0</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">x</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">width</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">x</span><span class="cm-operator">++</span>) {
      <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">element</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">get</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Vector</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">x</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">y</span>));
      <span class="cm-variable-2">output</span> <span class="cm-operator">+=</span> <span class="cm-variable">charFromElement</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">element</span>);
    }
    <span class="cm-variable-2">output</span> <span class="cm-operator">+=</span> <span class="cm-string">"\n"</span>;
  }
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">output</span>;
};</pre>
<p>A wall is
a simple object—it is used only for taking up space and has no
<code>act</code> method.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">Wall</span>() {}</pre>
<p>When we try the <code>World</code> object by creating an
instance based on the plan from <a href="07_elife.xhtml#plan">earlier in the
chapter</a> and then calling <code>toString</code> on it, we get a string very
similar to the plan we put in.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">world</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">World</span>(<span class="cm-variable">plan</span>, {<span class="cm-string cm-property">"#"</span>: <span class="cm-variable">Wall</span>,
                             <span class="cm-string cm-property">"o"</span>: <span class="cm-variable">BouncingCritter</span>});
<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">world</span>.<span class="cm-property">toString</span>());
<span class="cm-comment">// → ############################</span>
<span class="cm-comment">//   #      #    #      o      ##</span>
<span class="cm-comment">//   #                          #</span>
<span class="cm-comment">//   #          #####           #</span>
<span class="cm-comment">//   ##         #   #    ##     #</span>
<span class="cm-comment">//   ###           ##     #     #</span>
<span class="cm-comment">//   #           ###      #     #</span>
<span class="cm-comment">//   #   ####                   #</span>
<span class="cm-comment">//   #   ##       o             #</span>
<span class="cm-comment">//   # o  #         o       ### #</span>
<span class="cm-comment">//   #    #                     #</span>
<span class="cm-comment">//   ############################</span></pre>
<h2>this and its scope</h2>
<p>The <code>World</code> constructor contains a
call to <code>forEach</code>. One interesting thing to note is that inside the
function passed to <code>forEach</code>, we are no longer directly in the
function scope of the constructor. Each function call gets its own
<code>this</code> binding, so the <code>this</code> in the inner function does <em>not</em>
refer to the newly constructed object that the outer <code>this</code> refers to.
In fact, when a function isn&#8217;t called as a method, <code>this</code> will refer
to the global object.</p>
<p>This means that we can&#8217;t write <code>this.grid</code> to access the grid from
inside the loop. Instead, the outer function creates a normal
local variable, <code>grid</code>, through which the inner function gets access
to the grid.</p>
<p>This is a bit of a design blunder in JavaScript.
Fortunately, the next version of the language provides a solution for
this problem. Meanwhile, there are workarounds. A common pattern is to
say <code>var self = this</code> and from then on refer to <code>self</code>, which is a
normal variable and thus visible to inner functions.</p>
<p>Another solution is to use the <code>bind</code>
method, which allows us to provide an explicit <code>this</code> object to bind
to.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">test</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> {
  <span class="cm-property">prop</span>: <span class="cm-number">10</span>,
  <span class="cm-property">addPropTo</span>: <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">array</span>) {
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">array</span>.<span class="cm-property">map</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">elt</span>) {
      <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">prop</span> <span class="cm-operator">+</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">elt</span>;
    }.<span class="cm-property">bind</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">this</span>));
  }
};
<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">test</span>.<span class="cm-property">addPropTo</span>([<span class="cm-number">5</span>]));
<span class="cm-comment">// → [15]</span></pre>
<p>The function passed to <code>map</code> is the result of the
<code>bind</code> call and thus has its <code>this</code> bound to the first argument given
to <code>bind</code>—the outer function&#8217;s <code>this</code> value (which holds the <code>test</code>
object).</p>
<p>Most standard
higher-order methods on arrays, such as <code>forEach</code> and <code>map</code>, take an
optional second argument that can also be used to provide a <code>this</code> for
the calls to the iteration function. So you could express the previous example
in a slightly simpler way.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">test</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> {
  <span class="cm-property">prop</span>: <span class="cm-number">10</span>,
  <span class="cm-property">addPropTo</span>: <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">array</span>) {
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">array</span>.<span class="cm-property">map</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">elt</span>) {
      <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">prop</span> <span class="cm-operator">+</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">elt</span>;
    }, <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>); <span class="cm-comment">// ← no bind</span>
  }
};
<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">test</span>.<span class="cm-property">addPropTo</span>([<span class="cm-number">5</span>]));
<span class="cm-comment">// → [15]</span></pre>
<p>This works only for higher-order functions that
support such a <em>context</em> parameter. When they don&#8217;t, you&#8217;ll need to
use one of the other approaches.</p>
<p>In
our own higher-order functions, we can support such a context
parameter by using the <code>call</code> method to call the function given as an
argument. For example, here is a <code>forEach</code> method for our <code>Grid</code> type,
which calls a given function for each element in the grid that isn&#8217;t
null or undefined:</p>
<pre><span class="cm-variable">Grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span>.<span class="cm-property">forEach</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">f</span>, <span class="cm-def">context</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">for</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">y</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-number">0</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">y</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">height</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">y</span><span class="cm-operator">++</span>) {
    <span class="cm-keyword">for</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">x</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-number">0</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">x</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">width</span>; <span class="cm-variable-2">x</span><span class="cm-operator">++</span>) {
      <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">value</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">space</span>[<span class="cm-variable-2">x</span> <span class="cm-operator">+</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">y</span> <span class="cm-operator">*</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">width</span>];
      <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">value</span> <span class="cm-operator">!=</span> <span class="cm-atom">null</span>)
        <span class="cm-variable-2">f</span>.<span class="cm-property">call</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">context</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">value</span>, <span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Vector</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">x</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">y</span>));
    }
  }
};</pre>
<h2>Animating life</h2>
<p>The next
step is to write a <code>turn</code> method for the world object that gives the
critters a chance to act. It will go over the grid using the
<code>forEach</code> method we just defined, looking for objects with an <code>act</code>
method. When it finds one, <code>turn</code> calls that method to get an action
object and carries out the action when it is valid. For now, only
<code>"move"</code> actions are understood.</p>
<p>There is one potential problem with this approach. Can you
spot it? If we let critters move as we come across them, they may move
to a square that we haven&#8217;t looked at yet, and we&#8217;ll allow them to
move <em>again</em> when we reach that square. Thus, we have to keep an array
of critters that have already had their turn and ignore them when we
see them again.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-variable">World</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span>.<span class="cm-property">turn</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>() {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">acted</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> [];
  <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">forEach</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">critter</span>, <span class="cm-def">vector</span>) {
    <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">critter</span>.<span class="cm-property">act</span> <span class="cm-operator">&amp;&amp;</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">acted</span>.<span class="cm-property">indexOf</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">critter</span>) <span class="cm-operator">==</span> <span class="cm-operator">-</span><span class="cm-number">1</span>) {
      <span class="cm-variable-2">acted</span>.<span class="cm-property">push</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">critter</span>);
      <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">letAct</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">critter</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">vector</span>);
    }
  }, <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>);
};</pre>
<p>We use the second parameter to the grid&#8217;s <code>forEach</code> method
to be able to access the correct <code>this</code> inside the inner function.
The <code>letAct</code> method contains the actual logic that allows the critters
to move.</p>
<pre id="checkDestination"><span class="cm-variable">World</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span>.<span class="cm-property">letAct</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">critter</span>, <span class="cm-def">vector</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">action</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">critter</span>.<span class="cm-property">act</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">View</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">this</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">vector</span>));
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">action</span> <span class="cm-operator">&amp;&amp;</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">action</span>.<span class="cm-property">type</span> <span class="cm-operator">==</span> <span class="cm-string">"move"</span>) {
    <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">dest</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">checkDestination</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">action</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">vector</span>);
    <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">dest</span> <span class="cm-operator">&amp;&amp;</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">get</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">dest</span>) <span class="cm-operator">==</span> <span class="cm-atom">null</span>) {
      <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">set</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">vector</span>, <span class="cm-atom">null</span>);
      <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">set</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">dest</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">critter</span>);
    }
  }
};

<span class="cm-variable">World</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span>.<span class="cm-property">checkDestination</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">action</span>, <span class="cm-def">vector</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable">directions</span>.<span class="cm-property">hasOwnProperty</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">action</span>.<span class="cm-property">direction</span>)) {
    <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">dest</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">vector</span>.<span class="cm-property">plus</span>(<span class="cm-variable">directions</span>[<span class="cm-variable-2">action</span>.<span class="cm-property">direction</span>]);
    <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">isInside</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">dest</span>))
      <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">dest</span>;
  }
};</pre>
<p>First, we simply ask the
critter to act, passing it a view object that knows about the world
and the critter&#8217;s current position in that world (we&#8217;ll define <code>View</code>
in a <a href="07_elife.xhtml#view">moment</a>). The <code>act</code> method returns an
action of some kind.</p>
<p>If the action&#8217;s <code>type</code> is not <code>"move"</code>, it is ignored. If it <em>is</em>
<code>"move"</code>,  if it has a <code>direction</code> property that refers to a valid
direction, <em>and</em> if the square in that direction is empty (null), we set
the square where the critter used to be to hold null and store the
critter in the destination square.</p>
<p>Note that <code>letAct</code> takes care to ignore
nonsense input—it doesn&#8217;t assume that the action&#8217;s <code>direction</code>
property is valid or that the <code>type</code> property makes sense. This kind
of <em>defensive</em> programming makes sense in some situations. The main
reason for doing it is to validate inputs coming from sources you
don&#8217;t control (such as user or file input), but it can also be useful
to isolate subsystems from each other. In this case, the intention is
that the critters themselves can be programmed sloppily—they don&#8217;t
have to verify if their intended actions make sense. They can just
request an action, and the world will figure out whether to allow it.</p>
<p>These two methods are not part of the external interface of a
<code>World</code> object. They are an internal detail. Some languages provide
ways to explicitly declare certain methods and properties <em>private</em>
and signal an error when you try to use them from outside the object.
JavaScript does not, so you will have to rely on some other form of
communication to describe what is part of an object&#8217;s interface.
Sometimes it can help to use a naming scheme to distinguish between
external and internal properties, for example by prefixing all
internal ones with an underscore character (_). This will make
accidental uses of properties that are not part of an object&#8217;s
interface easier to spot.</p>
<p id="view">The one missing part, the <code>View</code> type, looks like this:</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">View</span>(<span class="cm-def">world</span>, <span class="cm-def">vector</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">world</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">world</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">vector</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">vector</span>;
}
<span class="cm-variable">View</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span>.<span class="cm-property">look</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">dir</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">target</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">vector</span>.<span class="cm-property">plus</span>(<span class="cm-variable">directions</span>[<span class="cm-variable-2">dir</span>]);
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">world</span>.<span class="cm-property">grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">isInside</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">target</span>))
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable">charFromElement</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">world</span>.<span class="cm-property">grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">get</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">target</span>));
  <span class="cm-keyword">else</span>
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-string">"#"</span>;
};
<span class="cm-variable">View</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span>.<span class="cm-property">findAll</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">ch</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">found</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> [];
  <span class="cm-keyword">for</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">dir</span> <span class="cm-keyword">in</span> <span class="cm-variable">directions</span>)
    <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">look</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">dir</span>) <span class="cm-operator">==</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">ch</span>)
      <span class="cm-variable-2">found</span>.<span class="cm-property">push</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">dir</span>);
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">found</span>;
};
<span class="cm-variable">View</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span>.<span class="cm-property">find</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">ch</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">found</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">findAll</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">ch</span>);
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">found</span>.<span class="cm-property">length</span> <span class="cm-operator">==</span> <span class="cm-number">0</span>) <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-atom">null</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable">randomElement</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">found</span>);
};</pre>
<p>The <code>look</code> method figures out the
coordinates that we are trying to look at and, if they are inside the
grid, finds the character corresponding to the element that sits
there. For coordinates outside the grid, <code>look</code> simply pretends that
there is a wall there so that if you define a world that isn&#8217;t walled
in, the critters still won&#8217;t be tempted to try to walk off the edges.</p>
<h2>It moves</h2>
<p>We instantiated a world
object earlier. Now that we&#8217;ve added all the necessary methods, it
should be possible to actually make the world move.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">for</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">i</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-number">0</span>; <span class="cm-variable">i</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-number">5</span>; <span class="cm-variable">i</span><span class="cm-operator">++</span>) {
  <span class="cm-variable">world</span>.<span class="cm-property">turn</span>();
  <span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">world</span>.<span class="cm-property">toString</span>());
}
<span class="cm-comment">// → … five turns of moving critters</span></pre>
<p>The first two maps that are displayed will look something like this
(depending on the random direction the critters picked):</p>
<pre>############################  ############################
#      #    #             ##  #      #    #             ##
#                   o      #  #                          #
#          #####           #  #          #####     o     #
##         #   #    ##     #  ##         #   #    ##     #
###           ##     #     #  ###           ##     #     #
#           ###      #     #  #           ###      #     #
#   ####                   #  #   ####                   #
#   ##                     #  #   ##                     #
#    #       o         ### #  #o   #                 ### #
#o   #          o          #  #    #       o o           #
############################  ############################</pre>
<p>They move! To get a more interactive view of these
critters crawling around and bouncing off the walls, open this chapter
in the online version of the book at
<a href="http://eloquentjavascript.net"><em>eloquentjavascript.net</em></a>.</p>
<h2>More life forms</h2>
<p>The dramatic highlight of our world, if you watch for a bit, is when
two critters bounce off each other. Can you think of another
interesting form of behavior?</p>
<p>The one I came up with is a critter that moves
along walls. Conceptually, the critter keeps its left hand (paw,
tentacle, whatever) to the wall and follows along. This turns out to
be not entirely trivial to implement.</p>
<p>We need to be
able to “compute” with compass directions. Since directions are
modeled by a set of strings, we need to define our own operation
(<code>dirPlus</code>) to calculate relative directions. So <code>dirPlus("n", 1)</code>
means one 45-degree turn clockwise from north, giving <code>"ne"</code>.
Similarly, <code>dirPlus("s", -2)</code> means 90 degrees counterclockwise from
south, which is east.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">dirPlus</span>(<span class="cm-def">dir</span>, <span class="cm-def">n</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">index</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">directionNames</span>.<span class="cm-property">indexOf</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">dir</span>);
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable">directionNames</span>[(<span class="cm-variable-2">index</span> <span class="cm-operator">+</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">n</span> <span class="cm-operator">+</span> <span class="cm-number">8</span>) <span class="cm-operator">%</span> <span class="cm-number">8</span>];
}

<span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">WallFollower</span>() {
  <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">dir</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-string">"s"</span>;
}

<span class="cm-variable">WallFollower</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span>.<span class="cm-property">act</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">view</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">start</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">dir</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">view</span>.<span class="cm-property">look</span>(<span class="cm-variable">dirPlus</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">dir</span>, <span class="cm-operator">-</span><span class="cm-number">3</span>)) <span class="cm-operator">!=</span> <span class="cm-string">" "</span>)
    <span class="cm-variable-2">start</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">dir</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">dirPlus</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">dir</span>, <span class="cm-operator">-</span><span class="cm-number">2</span>);
  <span class="cm-keyword">while</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">view</span>.<span class="cm-property">look</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">dir</span>) <span class="cm-operator">!=</span> <span class="cm-string">" "</span>) {
    <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">dir</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">dirPlus</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">dir</span>, <span class="cm-number">1</span>);
    <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">dir</span> <span class="cm-operator">==</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">start</span>) <span class="cm-keyword">break</span>;
  }
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> {<span class="cm-property">type</span>: <span class="cm-string">"move"</span>, <span class="cm-property">direction</span>: <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">dir</span>};
};</pre>
<p>The <code>act</code>
method only has to “scan” the critter&#8217;s surroundings, starting from
its left side and going clockwise until it finds an empty square.
It then moves in the direction of that empty square.</p>
<p>What complicates things is that a critter may end up in the middle of
empty space, either as its start position or as a result of walking
around another critter. If we apply the approach I just described in
empty space, the poor critter will just keep on turning left at every
step, running in circles.</p>
<p>So there is an extra check (the <code>if</code> statement) to start scanning to
the left only if it looks like the critter has just passed some kind
of obstacle—that is, if the space behind and to the left of the
critter is not empty. Otherwise, the critter starts scanning directly
ahead, so that it&#8217;ll walk straight when in empty space.</p>
<p>And finally, there&#8217;s a test comparing <code>this.dir</code> to
<code>start</code> after every pass through the loop to make sure that the loop
won&#8217;t run forever when the critter is walled in or crowded in by other
critters and can&#8217;t find an empty square.</p>
<h2>A more lifelike simulation</h2>
<p>To make life in our world
more interesting, we will add the concepts of food and
reproduction. Each living thing in the world gets a new property,
<code>energy</code>, which is reduced by performing actions and increased by
eating things. When the critter has enough energy, it can
reproduce, generating a new critter of the same kind. To keep things
simple, the critters in our world reproduce asexually, all by
themselves.</p>
<p>If critters only move around and eat one
another, the world will soon succumb to the law of increasing entropy,
run out of energy, and become a lifeless wasteland. To prevent this
from happening (too quickly, at least), we add plants to the
world. Plants do not move. They just use photosynthesis to grow
(that is, increase their energy) and reproduce.</p>
<p>To make this work, we&#8217;ll need a world with a different
<code>letAct</code> method. We could just replace the method of the <code>World</code>
prototype, but I&#8217;ve become very attached to our simulation with the
wall-following critters and would hate to break that old world.</p>
<p>One solution is to use
inheritance. We create a new constructor, <code>LifelikeWorld</code>,
whose prototype is based on the <code>World</code> prototype but which overrides
the <code>letAct</code> method. The new <code>letAct</code> method delegates the work of
actually performing an action to various functions stored in the
<code>actionTypes</code> object.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">LifelikeWorld</span>(<span class="cm-def">map</span>, <span class="cm-def">legend</span>) {
  <span class="cm-variable">World</span>.<span class="cm-property">call</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">this</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">map</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">legend</span>);
}
<span class="cm-variable">LifelikeWorld</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">Object</span>.<span class="cm-property">create</span>(<span class="cm-variable">World</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span>);

<span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">actionTypes</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">Object</span>.<span class="cm-property">create</span>(<span class="cm-atom">null</span>);

<span class="cm-variable">LifelikeWorld</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span>.<span class="cm-property">letAct</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">critter</span>, <span class="cm-def">vector</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">action</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">critter</span>.<span class="cm-property">act</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">View</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">this</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">vector</span>));
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">handled</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">action</span> <span class="cm-operator">&amp;&amp;</span>
    <span class="cm-variable-2">action</span>.<span class="cm-property">type</span> <span class="cm-keyword">in</span> <span class="cm-variable">actionTypes</span> <span class="cm-operator">&amp;&amp;</span>
    <span class="cm-variable">actionTypes</span>[<span class="cm-variable-2">action</span>.<span class="cm-property">type</span>].<span class="cm-property">call</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">this</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">critter</span>,
                                  <span class="cm-variable-2">vector</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">action</span>);
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-operator">!</span><span class="cm-variable-2">handled</span>) {
    <span class="cm-variable-2">critter</span>.<span class="cm-property">energy</span> <span class="cm-operator">-=</span> <span class="cm-number">0.2</span>;
    <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">critter</span>.<span class="cm-property">energy</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;=</span> <span class="cm-number">0</span>)
      <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">set</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">vector</span>, <span class="cm-atom">null</span>);
  }
};</pre>
<p>The new <code>letAct</code> method first checks whether an
action was returned at all, then whether a handler function for this
type of action exists, and finally whether that handler returned
true, indicating that it successfully handled the action. Note the use
of <code>call</code> to give the handler access to the world, through its <code>this</code>
binding.</p>
<p>If the action didn&#8217;t work for whatever reason, the default action is
for the creature to simply wait. It loses one-fifth point of energy,
and if its energy level drops to zero or below, the creature dies and
is removed from the grid.</p>
<h2>Action handlers</h2>
<p>The simplest action a creature can perform is
<code>"grow"</code>, used by plants. When an action object like <code>{type:
"grow"}</code> is returned, the following handler method will be called:</p>
<pre><span class="cm-variable">actionTypes</span>.<span class="cm-property">grow</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">critter</span>) {
  <span class="cm-variable-2">critter</span>.<span class="cm-property">energy</span> <span class="cm-operator">+=</span> <span class="cm-number">0.5</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-atom">true</span>;
};</pre>
<p>Growing always succeeds and adds half a point to the plant&#8217;s
energy level.</p>
<p>Moving is more involved.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-variable">actionTypes</span>.<span class="cm-property">move</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">critter</span>, <span class="cm-def">vector</span>, <span class="cm-def">action</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">dest</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">checkDestination</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">action</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">vector</span>);
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">dest</span> <span class="cm-operator">==</span> <span class="cm-atom">null</span> <span class="cm-operator">||</span>
      <span class="cm-variable-2">critter</span>.<span class="cm-property">energy</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;=</span> <span class="cm-number">1</span> <span class="cm-operator">||</span>
      <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">get</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">dest</span>) <span class="cm-operator">!=</span> <span class="cm-atom">null</span>)
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-atom">false</span>;
  <span class="cm-variable-2">critter</span>.<span class="cm-property">energy</span> <span class="cm-operator">-=</span> <span class="cm-number">1</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">set</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">vector</span>, <span class="cm-atom">null</span>);
  <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">set</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">dest</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">critter</span>);
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-atom">true</span>;
};</pre>
<p>This action first checks, using the <code>checkDestination</code>
method defined <a href="07_elife.xhtml#checkDestination">earlier</a>, whether
the action provides a valid destination. If not, or if the
destination isn&#8217;t empty, or if the critter lacks the required
energy, <code>move</code> returns false to indicate no action was taken.
Otherwise, it moves the critter and subtracts the energy cost.</p>
<p>In addition to moving, critters can eat.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-variable">actionTypes</span>.<span class="cm-property">eat</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">critter</span>, <span class="cm-def">vector</span>, <span class="cm-def">action</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">dest</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">checkDestination</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">action</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">vector</span>);
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">atDest</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">dest</span> <span class="cm-operator">!=</span> <span class="cm-atom">null</span> <span class="cm-operator">&amp;&amp;</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">get</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">dest</span>);
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-operator">!</span><span class="cm-variable-2">atDest</span> <span class="cm-operator">||</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">atDest</span>.<span class="cm-property">energy</span> <span class="cm-operator">==</span> <span class="cm-atom">null</span>)
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-atom">false</span>;
  <span class="cm-variable-2">critter</span>.<span class="cm-property">energy</span> <span class="cm-operator">+=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">atDest</span>.<span class="cm-property">energy</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">set</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">dest</span>, <span class="cm-atom">null</span>);
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-atom">true</span>;
};</pre>
<p>Eating another critter also involves providing a
valid destination square. This time, the destination must not be
empty and must contain something with energy, like a critter (but
not a wall—walls are not edible). If so, the energy from the eaten is
transferred to the eater, and the victim is removed from the grid.</p>
<p>And finally, we allow our critters to reproduce.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-variable">actionTypes</span>.<span class="cm-property">reproduce</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">critter</span>, <span class="cm-def">vector</span>, <span class="cm-def">action</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">baby</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">elementFromChar</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">legend</span>,
                             <span class="cm-variable-2">critter</span>.<span class="cm-property">originChar</span>);
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">dest</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">checkDestination</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">action</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">vector</span>);
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">dest</span> <span class="cm-operator">==</span> <span class="cm-atom">null</span> <span class="cm-operator">||</span>
      <span class="cm-variable-2">critter</span>.<span class="cm-property">energy</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;=</span> <span class="cm-number">2</span> <span class="cm-operator">*</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">baby</span>.<span class="cm-property">energy</span> <span class="cm-operator">||</span>
      <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">get</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">dest</span>) <span class="cm-operator">!=</span> <span class="cm-atom">null</span>)
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-atom">false</span>;
  <span class="cm-variable-2">critter</span>.<span class="cm-property">energy</span> <span class="cm-operator">-=</span> <span class="cm-number">2</span> <span class="cm-operator">*</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">baby</span>.<span class="cm-property">energy</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">grid</span>.<span class="cm-property">set</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">dest</span>, <span class="cm-variable-2">baby</span>);
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-atom">true</span>;
};</pre>
<p>Reproducing costs twice the energy
level of the newborn critter. So we first create a (hypothetical) baby
using <code>elementFromChar</code> on the critter&#8217;s own origin character. Once we
have a baby, we can find its energy level and test whether the parent
has enough energy to successfully bring it into the world. We also
require a valid (and empty) destination.</p>
<p>If everything is okay, the baby is put onto the grid
(it is now no longer hypothetical), and the energy is spent.</p>
<h2>Populating the new world</h2>
<p>We now have a
framework to simulate these more lifelike creatures. We could put
the critters from the old world into it, but they would just die
since they don&#8217;t have an energy property. So let&#8217;s make new ones.
First we&#8217;ll write a plant, which is a rather simple life-form.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">Plant</span>() {
  <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">energy</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-number">3</span> <span class="cm-operator">+</span> <span class="cm-variable">Math</span>.<span class="cm-property">random</span>() <span class="cm-operator">*</span> <span class="cm-number">4</span>;
}
<span class="cm-variable">Plant</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span>.<span class="cm-property">act</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">view</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">energy</span> <span class="cm-operator">></span> <span class="cm-number">15</span>) {
    <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">space</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">view</span>.<span class="cm-property">find</span>(<span class="cm-string">" "</span>);
    <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">space</span>)
      <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> {<span class="cm-property">type</span>: <span class="cm-string">"reproduce"</span>, <span class="cm-property">direction</span>: <span class="cm-variable-2">space</span>};
  }
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">energy</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-number">20</span>)
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> {<span class="cm-property">type</span>: <span class="cm-string">"grow"</span>};
};</pre>
<p>Plants start with an energy level
between 3 and 7, randomized so that they don&#8217;t all reproduce in the
same turn. When a plant reaches 15 energy points and there is empty
space nearby, it reproduces into that empty space. If a plant can&#8217;t
reproduce, it simply grows until it reaches energy level 20.</p>
<p>We
now define a plant eater.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">PlantEater</span>() {
  <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">energy</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-number">20</span>;
}
<span class="cm-variable">PlantEater</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span>.<span class="cm-property">act</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">view</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">space</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">view</span>.<span class="cm-property">find</span>(<span class="cm-string">" "</span>);
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">energy</span> <span class="cm-operator">></span> <span class="cm-number">60</span> <span class="cm-operator">&amp;&amp;</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">space</span>)
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> {<span class="cm-property">type</span>: <span class="cm-string">"reproduce"</span>, <span class="cm-property">direction</span>: <span class="cm-variable-2">space</span>};
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">plant</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">view</span>.<span class="cm-property">find</span>(<span class="cm-string">"*"</span>);
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">plant</span>)
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> {<span class="cm-property">type</span>: <span class="cm-string">"eat"</span>, <span class="cm-property">direction</span>: <span class="cm-variable-2">plant</span>};
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">space</span>)
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> {<span class="cm-property">type</span>: <span class="cm-string">"move"</span>, <span class="cm-property">direction</span>: <span class="cm-variable-2">space</span>};
};</pre>
<p>We&#8217;ll use the <code>*</code> character for plants, so that&#8217;s what this
creature will look for when it searches for food.</p>
<h2>Bringing it to life</h2>
<p>And that gives us enough elements to try
our new world. Imagine the following map as a grassy valley with a herd of
herbivores in it, some boulders, and lush plant life
everywhere.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">valley</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">LifelikeWorld</span>(
  [<span class="cm-string">"############################"</span>,
   <span class="cm-string">"#####                 ######"</span>,
   <span class="cm-string">"##   ***                **##"</span>,
   <span class="cm-string">"#   *##**         **  O  *##"</span>,
   <span class="cm-string">"#    ***     O    ##**    *#"</span>,
   <span class="cm-string">"#       O         ##***    #"</span>,
   <span class="cm-string">"#                 ##**     #"</span>,
   <span class="cm-string">"#   O       #*             #"</span>,
   <span class="cm-string">"#*          #**       O    #"</span>,
   <span class="cm-string">"#***        ##**    O    **#"</span>,
   <span class="cm-string">"##****     ###***       *###"</span>,
   <span class="cm-string">"############################"</span>],
  {<span class="cm-string cm-property">"#"</span>: <span class="cm-variable">Wall</span>,
   <span class="cm-string cm-property">"O"</span>: <span class="cm-variable">PlantEater</span>,
   <span class="cm-string cm-property">"*"</span>: <span class="cm-variable">Plant</span>}
);</pre>
<p>Let&#8217;s see what happens if we run this.
These snapshots illustrate a typical run of this world.</p>
<pre>############################  ############################
#####                 ######  ##### **              ######
##   ***   O             *##  ##  ** *            O     ##
#   *##*          **     *##  #  **##                   ##
#    **           ##*     *#  #  **  O          ##O      #
#                 ##*      #  #   *O      * *   ##       #
#                 ##  O    #  #            ***  ##     O #
#           #*      O      #  #**         #***           #
#*          #**  O         #  #**      O  #****          #
#*   O    O ##*          **#  #***        ##***     O    #
##*        ###*          ###  ##**       ###**    O    ###
############################  ############################

############################  ############################
#####O O              ######  #####  O              ######
##                        ##  ##                        ##
#    ##O                  ##  #    ##            O      ##
#           O  O *##       #  #                 ##       #
#  O    O    O  **##    O  #  #                 ##       #
#               **##     O #  #               O ## *     #
#           #   *** *      #  #           #  O           #
#           # O*****  O    #  #        O  #   O          #
#           ##******       #  #           ##    O     O  #
##         ###******     ###  ##         ### O         ###
############################  ############################

############################  ############################
#####                 ######  #####                 ######
##                        ##  ##                 **  *  ##
#    ##                   ##  #    ##            *****  ##
#                 ##       #  #                 ##****   #
#                 ##* *    #  #                 ##*****  #
#              O  ## *     #  #                 ##****** #
#           #              #  #           #       ** **  #
#           #              #  #           #              #
#           ##             #  #           ##             #
##         ###           ###  ##         ###           ###
############################  ############################</pre>
<p>Most
of the time, the plants multiply and expand quite quickly, but then
the abundance of food causes a population explosion of the
herbivores, who proceed to wipe out all or nearly all of the
plants, resulting in a mass starvation of the critters. Sometimes,
the ecosystem recovers and another cycle starts. At other times,
one of the species dies out completely. If it&#8217;s the herbivores, the
whole space will fill with plants. If it&#8217;s the plants, the remaining
critters starve, and the valley becomes a desolate wasteland. Ah, the
cruelty of nature.</p>
<h2>Exercises</h2>
<h3>Artificial stupidity</h3>
<p>Having the inhabitants of our world go
extinct after a few minutes is kind of depressing. To deal with this,
we could try to create a smarter plant eater.</p>
<p>There are several obvious
problems with our herbivores. First, they are terribly greedy,
stuffing themselves with every plant they see until they have wiped
out the local plant life. Second, their randomized movement (recall
that the <code>view.find</code> method returns a random direction when multiple
directions match) causes them to stumble around ineffectively and
starve if there don&#8217;t happen to be any plants nearby. And finally,
they breed very fast, which makes the cycles between abundance and
famine quite intense.</p>
<p>Write a new critter type that tries to address one or more of these
points and substitute it for the old <code>PlantEater</code> type in the valley
world. See how it fares. Tweak it some more if necessary.</p>
<h3>Predators</h3>
<p>Any serious
ecosystem has a food chain longer than a single link. Write
another critter that survives by eating the herbivore critter.
You&#8217;ll notice that stability is even harder to achieve now that there
are cycles at multiple levels. Try to find a strategy to make the
ecosystem run smoothly for at least a little while.</p>
<p>One thing that will help is to make the world bigger.
This way, local population booms or busts are less likely to wipe out
a species entirely, and there is space for the relatively large prey
population needed to sustain a small predator population.</p>
    </article>
  </body>
</html>
