<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <title>Bugs and Error Handling</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <article>

<h1 id="error"><span class="chap_num">Chapter 8</span>Bugs and Error Handling</h1>
<blockquote>
<p>Debugging is
twice as hard as writing the code in the first place. Therefore, if
you write the code as cleverly as possible, you are, by definition,
not smart enough to debug it.</p>
 <footer>Brian Kernighan and P.J. Plauger, <cite>The Elements of Programming Style</cite></footer>
</blockquote>
<p>A program is crystallized thought.
Sometimes those thoughts are confused. Other times, mistakes are
introduced when converting thought into code. Either way, the result
is a flawed program.</p>
<p>Flaws in a program are usually called bugs.
Bugs can be programmer errors or problems in other systems that the
program interacts with. Some bugs are immediately apparent, while
others are subtle and might remain hidden in a system for years.</p>
<p>Often, problems surface only when a program encounters a situation
that the programmer didn&#8217;t originally consider. Sometimes such
situations are unavoidable. When the user is asked to input their age
and types <em>orange</em>, this puts our program in a difficult position. The
situation has to be anticipated and handled somehow.</p>
<h2>Programmer mistakes</h2>
<p>When it comes to programmer mistakes, our
aim is simple. We want to find them and fix them. Such mistakes can
range from simple typos that cause the computer to complain as
soon as it lays eyes on our program to subtle mistakes in our
understanding of the way the program operates, causing incorrect
outcomes only in specific situations. Bugs of the latter type can
take weeks to diagnose.</p>
<p>The degree to which languages
help you find such mistakes varies. Unsurprisingly, JavaScript is at
the “hardly helps at all” end of that scale. Some languages want to
know the types of all your variables and expressions before even
running a program and will tell you right away when a type is used in
an inconsistent way. JavaScript considers types only when actually
running the program, and even then, it allows you to do some clearly
nonsensical things without complaint, such as <code>x = true * "monkey"</code>.</p>
<p>There are some things that JavaScript does complain about,
though. Writing a program that is not syntactically valid will
immediately trigger an error. Other things, such as calling something
that&#8217;s not a function or looking up a property on an undefined
value, will cause an error to be reported when the program is running
and encounters the nonsensical action.</p>
<p>But often, your nonsense computation will simply
produce a <code>NaN</code> (not a number) or undefined value. And the program
happily continues, convinced that it&#8217;s doing something meaningful. The
mistake will manifest itself only later, after the bogus value has
traveled through several functions. It might not trigger an error at
all but silently cause the program&#8217;s output to be wrong. Finding the
source of such problems can be difficult.</p>
<p>The process of finding mistakes—bugs—in programs is
called <em>debugging</em>.</p>
<h2>Strict mode</h2>
<p>JavaScript can be made a
<em>little</em> more strict by enabling <em>strict mode</em>. This is done by
putting the string <code>"use strict"</code> at the top of a file or a function
body. Here&#8217;s an example:</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">canYouSpotTheProblem</span>() {
  <span class="cm-string">"use strict"</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">for</span> (<span class="cm-variable">counter</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-number">0</span>; <span class="cm-variable">counter</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-number">10</span>; <span class="cm-variable">counter</span><span class="cm-operator">++</span>)
    <span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-string">"Happy happy"</span>);
}

<span class="cm-variable">canYouSpotTheProblem</span>();
<span class="cm-comment">// → ReferenceError: counter is not defined</span></pre>
<p>Normally, when you forget to put
<code>var</code> in front of your variable, as with <code>counter</code> in the example,
JavaScript quietly creates a global variable and uses that. In strict
mode, however, an error is reported instead. This is very helpful.
It should be noted, though, that this doesn&#8217;t work when the variable
in question already exists as a global variable, but only when
assigning to it would have created it.</p>
<p>Another
change in strict mode is that the <code>this</code> binding holds the value
<code>undefined</code> in functions that are not called as methods. When
making such a call outside of strict mode, <code>this</code> refers to the global
scope object. So if you accidentally call a method or constructor
incorrectly in strict mode, JavaScript will produce an error as soon
as it tries to read something from <code>this</code>, rather than happily working
with the global object, creating and reading global variables.</p>
<p>For example, consider the following code, which calls a
constructor without the <code>new</code> keyword so that its <code>this</code> will
<em>not</em> refer to a newly constructed object:</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">Person</span>(<span class="cm-def">name</span>) { <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">name</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">name</span>; }
<span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">ferdinand</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">Person</span>(<span class="cm-string">"Ferdinand"</span>); <span class="cm-comment">// oops</span>
<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">name</span>);
<span class="cm-comment">// → Ferdinand</span></pre>
<p>So the bogus call to <code>Person</code> succeeded but returned an
undefined value and created the global variable <code>name</code>. In strict
mode, the result is different.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-string">"use strict"</span>;
<span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">Person</span>(<span class="cm-def">name</span>) { <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">name</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">name</span>; }
<span class="cm-comment">// Oops, forgot 'new'</span>
<span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">ferdinand</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">Person</span>(<span class="cm-string">"Ferdinand"</span>);
<span class="cm-comment">// → TypeError: Cannot set property 'name' of undefined</span></pre>
<p>We are immediately told that something is wrong. This is helpful.</p>
<p>Strict mode
does a few more things. It disallows giving a function multiple
parameters with the same name and removes certain problematic
language features entirely (such as the <code>with</code> statement, which is so
misguided it is not further discussed in this book).</p>
<p>In short, putting a <code>"use strict"</code> at the top of your
program rarely hurts and might help you spot a problem.</p>
<h2>Testing</h2>
<p>If the language is not going to do
much to help us find mistakes, we&#8217;ll have to find them the hard way:
by running the program and seeing whether it does the right thing.</p>
<p>Doing this by hand, again and again, is a sure way to drive yourself
insane. Fortunately, it is often possible to write a second program
that automates testing your actual program.</p>
<p>As an example, we once again use the <code>Vector</code> type.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">Vector</span>(<span class="cm-def">x</span>, <span class="cm-def">y</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">x</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">x</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">y</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">y</span>;
}
<span class="cm-variable">Vector</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span>.<span class="cm-property">plus</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>(<span class="cm-def">other</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Vector</span>(<span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">x</span> <span class="cm-operator">+</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">other</span>.<span class="cm-property">x</span>, <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">y</span> <span class="cm-operator">+</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">other</span>.<span class="cm-property">y</span>);
};</pre>
<p>We will write a program to check that our implementation of <code>Vector</code>
works as intended. Then, every time we change the implementation, we
follow up by running the test program so that we can be reasonably
confident that we didn&#8217;t break anything. When we add extra
functionality (for example, a new method) to the <code>Vector</code> type, we also
add tests for the new feature.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">testVector</span>() {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">p1</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Vector</span>(<span class="cm-number">10</span>, <span class="cm-number">20</span>);
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">p2</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Vector</span>(<span class="cm-operator">-</span><span class="cm-number">10</span>, <span class="cm-number">5</span>);
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">p3</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">p1</span>.<span class="cm-property">plus</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">p2</span>);

  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">p1</span>.<span class="cm-property">x</span> <span class="cm-operator">!==</span> <span class="cm-number">10</span>) <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-string">"fail: x property"</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">p1</span>.<span class="cm-property">y</span> <span class="cm-operator">!==</span> <span class="cm-number">20</span>) <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-string">"fail: y property"</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">p2</span>.<span class="cm-property">x</span> <span class="cm-operator">!==</span> <span class="cm-operator">-</span><span class="cm-number">10</span>) <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-string">"fail: negative x property"</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">p3</span>.<span class="cm-property">x</span> <span class="cm-operator">!==</span> <span class="cm-number">0</span>) <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-string">"fail: x from plus"</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">p3</span>.<span class="cm-property">y</span> <span class="cm-operator">!==</span> <span class="cm-number">25</span>) <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-string">"fail: y from plus"</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-string">"everything ok"</span>;
}
<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">testVector</span>());
<span class="cm-comment">// → everything ok</span></pre>
<p>Writing tests like this tends to produce rather repetitive,
awkward code. Fortunately, there exist pieces of software that help
you build and run collections of tests (<em>test suites</em>) by providing a
language (in the form of functions and methods) suited to expressing
tests and by outputting informative information when a test fails. These
are called <em>testing frameworks</em>.</p>
<h2>Debugging</h2>
<p>Once you notice that there is something wrong with your
program because it misbehaves or produces errors, the next step is to
figure out <em>what</em> the problem is.</p>
<p>Sometimes it is obvious. The error message will point at a
specific line of your program, and if you look at the error
description and that line of code, you can often see the problem.</p>
<p>But not always. Sometimes the line that triggered
the problem is simply the first place where a bogus value produced
elsewhere gets used in an invalid way. And sometimes there is no error
message at all—just an invalid result. If you have been solving the
exercises in the earlier chapters, you will probably have already
experienced such situations.</p>
<p>The following example program
tries to convert a whole number to a string in any base (decimal,
binary, and so on) by repeatedly picking out the last digit and then
dividing the number to get rid of this digit. But the insane output
that it currently produces suggests that it has a bug.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">numberToString</span>(<span class="cm-def">n</span>, <span class="cm-def">base</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">result</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-string">""</span>, <span class="cm-def">sign</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-string">""</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">n</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-number">0</span>) {
    <span class="cm-variable-2">sign</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-string">"-"</span>;
    <span class="cm-variable-2">n</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-operator">-</span><span class="cm-variable-2">n</span>;
  }
  <span class="cm-keyword">do</span> {
    <span class="cm-variable-2">result</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">String</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">n</span> <span class="cm-operator">%</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">base</span>) <span class="cm-operator">+</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">result</span>;
    <span class="cm-variable-2">n</span> <span class="cm-operator">/=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">base</span>;
  } <span class="cm-keyword">while</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">n</span> <span class="cm-operator">></span> <span class="cm-number">0</span>);
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">sign</span> <span class="cm-operator">+</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">result</span>;
}
<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">numberToString</span>(<span class="cm-number">13</span>, <span class="cm-number">10</span>));
<span class="cm-comment">// → 1.5e-3231.3e-3221.3e-3211.3e-3201.3e-3191.3e-3181.3…</span></pre>
<p>Even if you see the problem already, pretend for a
moment that you don&#8217;t. We know that our program is malfunctioning, and
we want to find out why.</p>
<p>This is where you must resist the urge to start
making random changes to the code. Instead, <em>think</em>. Analyze what is
happening and come up with a theory of why it might be happening.
Then, make additional observations to test this theory—or, if you
don&#8217;t yet have a theory, make additional observations that might help
you come up with one.</p>
<p>Putting a few
strategic <code>console.log</code> calls into the program is a good way to get
additional information about what the program is doing. In this case,
we want <code>n</code> to take the values <code>13</code>, <code>1</code>, and then <code>0</code>. Let&#8217;s write
out its value at the start of the loop.</p>
<pre>13
1.3
0.13
0.013
…
1.5e-323</pre>
<p><em>Right</em>. Dividing 13 by 10 does not produce a whole
number. Instead of <code>n /= base</code>, what we actually want is <code>n =
Math.floor(n / base)</code> so that the number is properly “shifted” to the
right.</p>
<p>An
alternative to using <code>console.log</code> is to use the <em>debugger</em>
capabilities of your browser. Modern browsers come with the ability to
set a <em>breakpoint</em> on a specific line of your code. This will cause
the execution of the program to pause every time the line with the
breakpoint is reached and allow you to inspect the values of
variables at that point. I won&#8217;t go into details here since debuggers
differ from browser to browser, but look in your browser&#8217;s developer
tools and search the Web for more information. Another way to set a
breakpoint is to include a <code>debugger</code> statement (consisting of simply
that keyword) in your program. If the developer tools of your
browser are active, the program will pause whenever it reaches that
statement, and you will be able to inspect its state.</p>
<h2>Error propagation</h2>
<p>Not all problems can be prevented
by the programmer, unfortunately. If your program communicates with
the outside world in any way, there is a chance that the input it gets
will be invalid or that other systems that it tries to talk to are
broken or unreachable.</p>
<p>Simple programs, or programs that run only under
your supervision, can afford to just give up when such a problem
occurs. You&#8217;ll look into the problem and try again. “Real”
applications, on the other hand, are expected to not simply crash.
Sometimes the right thing to do is take the bad input in stride and
continue running. In other cases, it is better to report to the user
what went wrong and then give up. But in either situation, the program
has to actively do something in response to the problem.</p>
<p>Say you have a function
<code>promptInteger</code> that asks the user for a whole number and returns it.
What should it return if the user inputs <em>orange</em>?</p>
<p>One option is to make it return a special value. Common
choices for such values are <code>null</code> and <code>undefined</code>.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">promptNumber</span>(<span class="cm-def">question</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">result</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">Number</span>(<span class="cm-variable">prompt</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">question</span>, <span class="cm-string">""</span>));
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable">isNaN</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">result</span>)) <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-atom">null</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">else</span> <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">result</span>;
}

<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">promptNumber</span>(<span class="cm-string">"How many trees do you see?"</span>));</pre>
<p>This is a sound strategy. Now any code that calls <code>promptNumber</code> must
check whether an actual number was read and, failing that, must
somehow recover—maybe by asking again or by filling in a default
value. Or it could again return a special value to <em>its</em> caller to
indicate that it failed to do what it was asked.</p>
<p>In many situations, mostly when errors are
common and the caller should be explicitly taking them into account,
returning a special value is a perfectly fine way to indicate an
error. It does, however, have its downsides. First, what if the
function can already return every possible kind of value? For such a
function, it is hard to find a special value that can be distinguished
from a valid result.</p>
<p>The second issue with
returning special values is that it can lead to some very cluttered
code. If a piece of code calls <code>promptNumber</code> 10 times, it has to
check 10 times whether <code>null</code> was returned. And if its response to
finding <code>null</code> is to simply return <code>null</code> itself, the caller will in
turn have to check for it, and so on.</p>
<h2>Exceptions</h2>
<p>When a function cannot proceed normally, what we
would <em>like</em> to do is just stop what we are doing and immediately jump
back to a place that knows how to handle the problem. This is what
<em>exception handling</em> does.</p>
<p>Exceptions are a mechanism that make it possible for code that
runs into a problem to <em>raise</em> (or <em>throw</em>) an exception, which is
simply a value. Raising an exception somewhat resembles a
super-charged return from a function: it jumps out of not just the
current function but also out of its callers, all the way down to the
first call that started the current execution. This is called
<em>unwinding the stack</em>. You may remember the stack of function
calls that was mentioned in <a href="03_functions.xhtml#stack">Chapter 3</a>.
An exception zooms down this stack, throwing away all the call
contexts it encounters.</p>
<p>If exceptions
always zoomed right down to the bottom of the stack, they would not be
of much use. They would just provide a novel way to blow up your
program. Their power lies in the fact that you can set “obstacles”
along the stack to <em>catch</em> the exception as it is zooming down. Then
you can do something with it, after which the program continues
running at the point where the exception was caught.</p>
<p>Here&#8217;s an example:</p>
<pre id="look"><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">promptDirection</span>(<span class="cm-def">question</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">result</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">prompt</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">question</span>, <span class="cm-string">""</span>);
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">result</span>.<span class="cm-property">toLowerCase</span>() <span class="cm-operator">==</span> <span class="cm-string">"left"</span>) <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-string">"L"</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">result</span>.<span class="cm-property">toLowerCase</span>() <span class="cm-operator">==</span> <span class="cm-string">"right"</span>) <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-string">"R"</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">throw</span> <span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Error</span>(<span class="cm-string">"Invalid direction: "</span> <span class="cm-operator">+</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">result</span>);
}

<span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">look</span>() {
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable">promptDirection</span>(<span class="cm-string">"Which way?"</span>) <span class="cm-operator">==</span> <span class="cm-string">"L"</span>)
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-string">"a house"</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">else</span>
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-string">"two angry bears"</span>;
}

<span class="cm-keyword">try</span> {
  <span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-string">"You see"</span>, <span class="cm-variable">look</span>());
} <span class="cm-keyword">catch</span> (<span class="cm-def">error</span>) {
  <span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-string">"Something went wrong: "</span> <span class="cm-operator">+</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">error</span>);
}</pre>
<p>The <code>throw</code> keyword is used to raise an
exception. Catching one is done by wrapping a piece of code in a <code>try</code>
block, followed by the keyword <code>catch</code>. When the code in the <code>try</code>
block causes an exception to be raised, the <code>catch</code> block is
evaluated. The variable name (in parentheses) after <code>catch</code> will be
bound to the exception value. After the <code>catch</code> block finishes—or if
the <code>try</code> block finishes without problems—control proceeds beneath the
entire <code>try/catch</code> statement.</p>
<p>In this case, we used the <code>Error</code> constructor to create
our exception value. This is a standard JavaScript constructor
that creates an object with a <code>message</code> property. In modern JavaScript
environments, instances of this constructor also gather information
about the call stack that existed when the exception was created, a
so-called <em>stack trace</em>. This information is stored in the <code>stack</code>
property and can be helpful when trying to debug a problem: it
tells us the precise function where the problem occurred and which
other functions led up to the call that failed.</p>
<p>Note that the function <code>look</code> completely
ignores the possibility that <code>promptDirection</code> might go wrong. This is
the big advantage of exceptions—error-handling code is necessary only
at the point where the error occurs and at the point where it is
handled. The functions in between can forget all about it.</p>
<p>Well, almost...</p>
<h2>Cleaning up after exceptions</h2>
<p>Consider the following situation: a
function, <code>withContext</code>, wants to make sure that, during its
execution, the top-level variable <code>context</code> holds a specific context
value. After it finishes, it restores this variable to its old value.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">context</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-atom">null</span>;

<span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">withContext</span>(<span class="cm-def">newContext</span>, <span class="cm-def">body</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">oldContext</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">context</span>;
  <span class="cm-variable">context</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">newContext</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">result</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">body</span>();
  <span class="cm-variable">context</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">oldContext</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">result</span>;
}</pre>
<p>What if <code>body</code> raises an exception? In that case, the call to
<code>withContext</code> will be thrown off the stack by the exception, and
<code>context</code> will never be set back to its old value.</p>
<p>There is one more
feature that <code>try</code> statements have. They may be followed by a
<code>finally</code> block either instead of or in addition to a <code>catch</code>
block. A <code>finally</code> block means “No matter <em>what</em> happens, run this
code after trying to run the code in the <code>try</code> block”. If a function
has to clean something up, the cleanup code should usually be put into
a <code>finally</code> block.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">withContext</span>(<span class="cm-def">newContext</span>, <span class="cm-def">body</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">oldContext</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">context</span>;
  <span class="cm-variable">context</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">newContext</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">try</span> {
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">body</span>();
  } <span class="cm-keyword">finally</span> {
    <span class="cm-variable">context</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">oldContext</span>;
  }
}</pre>
<p>Note that we no longer have to store the
result of <code>body</code> (which we want to return) in a variable. Even if we
return directly from the <code>try</code> block, the <code>finally</code> block will be run.
Now we can do this and be safe:</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">try</span> {
  <span class="cm-variable">withContext</span>(<span class="cm-number">5</span>, <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>() {
    <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable">context</span> <span class="cm-operator">&lt;</span> <span class="cm-number">10</span>)
      <span class="cm-keyword">throw</span> <span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Error</span>(<span class="cm-string">"Not enough context!"</span>);
  });
} <span class="cm-keyword">catch</span> (<span class="cm-def">e</span>) {
  <span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-string">"Ignoring: "</span> <span class="cm-operator">+</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">e</span>);
}
<span class="cm-comment">// → Ignoring: Error: Not enough context!</span>

<span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-variable">context</span>);
<span class="cm-comment">// → null</span></pre>
<p>Even though the function called from <code>withContext</code> exploded,
<code>withContext</code> itself still properly cleaned up the <code>context</code> variable.</p>
<h2>Selective catching</h2>
<p>When an
exception makes it all the way to the bottom of the stack without
being caught, it gets handled by the environment. What this means
differs between environments. In browsers, a description of the error
typically gets written to the JavaScript console (reachable through
the browser&#8217;s Tools or Developer menu).</p>
<p>For programmer mistakes or problems
that the program cannot possibly handle, just letting the error go
through is often okay. An unhandled exception is a reasonable way to
signal a broken program, and the JavaScript console will, on modern
browsers, provide you with some information about which function calls
were on the stack when the problem occurred.</p>
<p>For problems that are <em>expected</em> to happen during
routine use, crashing with an unhandled exception is not a very
friendly response.</p>
<p>Invalid uses of the language, such as referencing a nonexistent
variable, looking up a property on <code>null</code>, or calling something
that&#8217;s not a function, will also result in exceptions being raised.
Such exceptions can be caught just like your own exceptions.</p>
<p>When a <code>catch</code> body is entered, all we know is that
<em>something</em> in our <code>try</code> body caused an exception. But we don&#8217;t know
<em>what</em>, or <em>which</em> exception it caused.</p>
<p>JavaScript (in a rather glaring omission)
doesn&#8217;t provide direct support for selectively catching exceptions:
either you catch them all or you don&#8217;t catch any. This makes it very
easy to <em>assume</em> that the exception you get is the one you were
thinking about when you wrote the <code>catch</code> block.</p>
<p>But it might not be. Some other
assumption might be violated, or you might have introduced a bug
somewhere that is causing an exception. Here is an example, which
<em>attempts</em> to keep on calling <code>promptDirection</code> until it gets a valid
answer:</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">for</span> (;;) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">try</span> {
    <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">dir</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">promtDirection</span>(<span class="cm-string">"Where?"</span>); <span class="cm-comment">// ← typo!</span>
    <span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-string">"You chose "</span>, <span class="cm-variable">dir</span>);
    <span class="cm-keyword">break</span>;
  } <span class="cm-keyword">catch</span> (<span class="cm-def">e</span>) {
    <span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-string">"Not a valid direction. Try again."</span>);
  }
}</pre>
<p>The
<code>for (;;)</code> construct is a way to intentionally create a loop that
doesn&#8217;t terminate on its own. We break out of the loop only when a
valid direction is given. <em>But</em> we misspelled <code>promptDirection</code>,
which will result in an “undefined variable” error. Because the
<code>catch</code> block completely ignores its exception value (<code>e</code>), assuming
it knows what the problem is, it wrongly treats the variable error as
indicating bad input. Not only does this cause an infinite loop, but
it also “buries” the useful error message about the misspelled
variable.</p>
<p>As a general rule, don&#8217;t blanket-catch exceptions unless it is for the
purpose of “routing” them somewhere—for example, over the network to
tell another system that our program crashed. And even then, think
carefully about how you might be hiding information.</p>
<p>So we want to catch a <em>specific</em> kind of
exception. We can do this by checking in the <code>catch</code> block whether the
exception we got is the one we are interested in and by rethrowing it
otherwise. But how do we recognize an exception?</p>
<p>Of course, we could match its <code>message</code> property against the error
message we happen to expect. But that&#8217;s a shaky way to write code—we&#8217;d
be using information that&#8217;s intended for human consumption (the
message) to make a programmatic decision. As soon as someone changes
(or translates) the message, the code will stop working.</p>
<p>Rather, let&#8217;s define a new
type of error and use <code>instanceof</code> to identify it.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">InputError</span>(<span class="cm-def">message</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">message</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">message</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">stack</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Error</span>()).<span class="cm-property">stack</span>;
}
<span class="cm-variable">InputError</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">Object</span>.<span class="cm-property">create</span>(<span class="cm-variable">Error</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span>);
<span class="cm-variable">InputError</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span>.<span class="cm-property">name</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-string">"InputError"</span>;</pre>
<p>The prototype is made to derive
from <code>Error.prototype</code> so that <code>instanceof Error</code> will also return
true for <code>InputError</code> objects. It&#8217;s also given a <code>name</code> property
since the standard error types (<code>Error</code>, <code>SyntaxError</code>,
<code>ReferenceError</code>, and so on) also have such a property.</p>
<p>The assignment to the <code>stack</code> property tries to give
this object a somewhat useful stack trace, on platforms that
support it, by creating a regular error object and then using that
object&#8217;s <code>stack</code> property as its own.</p>
<p>Now <code>promptDirection</code> can throw such an
error.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">promptDirection</span>(<span class="cm-def">question</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-def">result</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">prompt</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">question</span>, <span class="cm-string">""</span>);
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">result</span>.<span class="cm-property">toLowerCase</span>() <span class="cm-operator">==</span> <span class="cm-string">"left"</span>) <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-string">"L"</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">result</span>.<span class="cm-property">toLowerCase</span>() <span class="cm-operator">==</span> <span class="cm-string">"right"</span>) <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-string">"R"</span>;
  <span class="cm-keyword">throw</span> <span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">InputError</span>(<span class="cm-string">"Invalid direction: "</span> <span class="cm-operator">+</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">result</span>);
}</pre>
<p>And the loop can catch it more carefully.</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">for</span> (;;) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">try</span> {
    <span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">dir</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">promptDirection</span>(<span class="cm-string">"Where?"</span>);
    <span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-string">"You chose "</span>, <span class="cm-variable">dir</span>);
    <span class="cm-keyword">break</span>;
  } <span class="cm-keyword">catch</span> (<span class="cm-def">e</span>) {
    <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-variable-2">e</span> <span class="cm-keyword">instanceof</span> <span class="cm-variable">InputError</span>)
      <span class="cm-variable">console</span>.<span class="cm-property">log</span>(<span class="cm-string">"Not a valid direction. Try again."</span>);
    <span class="cm-keyword">else</span>
      <span class="cm-keyword">throw</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">e</span>;
  }
}</pre>
<p>This will catch only instances of <code>InputError</code> and let
unrelated exceptions through. If you reintroduce the typo, the
undefined variable error will be properly reported.</p>
<h2>Assertions</h2>
<p><em>Assertions</em> are a
tool to do basic sanity checking for programmer errors. Consider this
helper function, <code>assert</code>:</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">AssertionFailed</span>(<span class="cm-def">message</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">message</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">message</span>;
}
<span class="cm-variable">AssertionFailed</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-variable">Object</span>.<span class="cm-property">create</span>(<span class="cm-variable">Error</span>.<span class="cm-property">prototype</span>);

<span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">assert</span>(<span class="cm-def">test</span>, <span class="cm-def">message</span>) {
  <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-operator">!</span><span class="cm-variable-2">test</span>)
    <span class="cm-keyword">throw</span> <span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">AssertionFailed</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">message</span>);
}

<span class="cm-keyword">function</span> <span class="cm-variable">lastElement</span>(<span class="cm-def">array</span>) {
  <span class="cm-variable">assert</span>(<span class="cm-variable-2">array</span>.<span class="cm-property">length</span> <span class="cm-operator">></span> <span class="cm-number">0</span>, <span class="cm-string">"empty array in lastElement"</span>);
  <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-variable-2">array</span>[<span class="cm-variable-2">array</span>.<span class="cm-property">length</span> <span class="cm-operator">-</span> <span class="cm-number">1</span>];
}</pre>
<p>This provides a
compact way to enforce expectations, helpfully blowing up the program
if the stated condition does not hold. For instance, the <code>lastElement</code>
function, which fetches the last element from an array, would return
<code>undefined</code> on empty arrays if the assertion was omitted. Fetching the
last element from an empty array does not make much sense, so it is
almost certainly a programmer error to do so.</p>
<p>Assertions are a way to make sure
mistakes cause failures at the point of the mistake, rather than
silently producing nonsense values that may go on to cause trouble in
an unrelated part of the system.</p>
<h2>Summary</h2>
<p>Mistakes and bad input are facts of life. Bugs in programs need to be
found and fixed. They can become easier to notice by having automated
test suites and adding assertions to your programs.</p>
<p>Problems caused by factors outside the program&#8217;s control should
usually be handled gracefully. Sometimes, when the problem can be
handled locally, special return values are a sane way to track them.
Otherwise, exceptions are preferable.</p>
<p>Throwing an exception causes the call stack to be unwound until the
next enclosing <code>try/catch</code> block or until the bottom of the stack.
The exception value will be given to the <code>catch</code> block that catches
it, which should verify that it is actually the expected kind of
exception and then do something with it. To deal with the
unpredictable control flow caused by exceptions, <code>finally</code> blocks can
be used to ensure a piece of code is <em>always</em> run when a block
finishes.</p>
<h2>Exercises</h2>
<h3>Retry</h3>
<p>Say you have a function <code>primitiveMultiply</code> that, in 50 percent of
cases, multiplies two numbers, and in the other 50 percent, raises an
exception of type <code>MultiplicatorUnitFailure</code>. Write a function that
wraps this clunky function and just keeps trying until a call
succeeds, after which it returns the result.</p>
<p>Make sure you handle only  the exceptions you
are trying to handle.</p>
<h3>The locked box</h3>
<p>Consider the following (rather contrived)
object:</p>
<pre><span class="cm-keyword">var</span> <span class="cm-variable">box</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> {
  <span class="cm-property">locked</span>: <span class="cm-atom">true</span>,
  <span class="cm-property">unlock</span>: <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>() { <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">locked</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-atom">false</span>; },
  <span class="cm-property">lock</span>: <span class="cm-keyword">function</span>() { <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">locked</span> <span class="cm-operator">=</span> <span class="cm-atom">true</span>;  },
  <span class="cm-property">_content</span>: [],
  <span class="cm-property">get</span> <span class="cm-property">content</span>() {
    <span class="cm-keyword">if</span> (<span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">locked</span>) <span class="cm-keyword">throw</span> <span class="cm-keyword">new</span> <span class="cm-variable">Error</span>(<span class="cm-string">"Locked!"</span>);
    <span class="cm-keyword">return</span> <span class="cm-keyword">this</span>.<span class="cm-property">_content</span>;
  }
};</pre>
<p>It is a box with a
lock. Inside is an array, but you can get at it only  when the box is
unlocked. Directly accessing the <code>_content</code> property is not allowed.</p>
<p>Write a function called
<code>withBoxUnlocked</code> that takes a function value as argument, unlocks the
box, runs the function, and then ensures that the box is locked again
before returning, regardless of whether the argument function returned
normally or threw an exception.</p>
    </article>
  </body>
</html>
